# Counting on Moru

Moru had strong likes and dislikes. When he liked something, he loved it. And when he did not like something, he absolutely hated it. No one could make him do things that he did not want to do and no one could stop him from doing what he wanted to do.

Moru liked to climb trees and steal raw mangoes. He would creep along the branch pretending to be a cheetah in a deep dark jungle. He enjoyed catching insects - the blue green bottle fly with the big shiny head, the thin and crisp grasshopper, and the yellow butterfly whose colour came off like powder on his fingers. Moru loved flying kites, the higher the better. He would climb to the tallest terrace to get his kite to soar far above the clouds like a brilliant eagle trying to reach the sun.

Moru liked numbers. Number 1 looked thin and lonely; 100 was fat and wealthy. How graceful 9 was, even more so when she stood next to 1 and became 19. Numbers were like an unending staircase. Moru imagined climbing them one by one by one, racing up, sometimes two, sometimes three or four or more steps at a time.

When he was tired, he saw himself sliding down the banister with the numbers waving at him. Unlike rice at lunchtime, which often finished before anyone was even half full, unlike friends who had to go home just as soon as the game was starting to be fun, numbers were always there. Unending and infinitely fun, to be juggled, sorted, matched, shared, laid out in a row, thrown away, put together and taken apart.

Moru liked going to school because many of his friends went too. He liked getting up in the morning and having somewhere to go. He liked the big playground but he did not like going to class. He did not like the teacher. He felt trapped in the room. The children could not ask questions, they could not move around and they could not speak when they wanted to say things. The teacher was bad-tempered. Moru felt that the teacher did not like the children at all. Maybe he did not even like being a teacher or coming to a school. In any case, children did not like the teacher either.

Every morning, the teacher wrote things on the blackboard. In a loud voice, he told the children to copy it down on their slates. Then he would go outside. If the boys could copy his things from the blackboard nicely, the teacher looked at it. If they could not do it, the teacher got angry. When he was angry, he would call the children names and if he got very angry he would hit them hard.

One day, the teacher wrote some sums on the board. The sums were easy but they were boring. Moru did not feel like doing them and he did not have a slate. His slate had broken and his mother did not have the money to buy a new one. Instead he counted the hundreds of ants that were climbing the wall. He looked at the tree outside and noticed that the leaves were perfect. Perfect leaves had perfect shadows. In his mind, Moru counted how many broken bricks there were along the school's compound wall. He calculated that if each brick costed five rupees it would take more than one thousand rupees to fill in all the gaps and broken spaces in the wall.

“Moru!” scolded the teacher. “Why are you not doing anything?” Moru looked blank. “Where is your slate? Why haven't you brought one to school?” shouted the teacher. Moru could see that the teacher was angry with him. Moru replied, “My old slate broke and I don't have the money to buy a new one.” The teacher was angry and gave Moru a sharp tap with the stick in his hand.

Moru continued softly, "Even if I had a slate I won't do the sums because I don't want to." The teacher was furious. He slapped Moru. Moru's cheek burned bright red. Sudden hot tears sprang into his eyes. He stood up and ran out of the room, down the verandah, across the dusty playground, through the broken gate and away.

The next morning, Moru's mother woke him up in time for school. But Moru would not get up. He lay on the narrow bed with his eyes tightly shut. Next day it was the same story, and the next day and the next. No one could persuade Moru to go back to school. One week passed and then one month. Moru sat on the wall in front of his house.

Sometimes he would disappear into the market for hours. He would try to fly his kite from the terrace but it was no fun because the sky was empty. His mother scolded him, his brother teased him, his grandmother begged him, his uncle bribed him and his friends coaxed him. But nobody could persuade him to return to school.

The rains came and school opened after the summer vacation. Everyone thought Moru would go back to school with all the children. “No,” said Moru very firmly. A year passed. Everyone gave up on Moru. Perhaps Moru gave up on himself too. Instead, he began to do other things.

He would go to the market and give the vegetable sellers a hard time. He would gang up with other children like him who had left school and tease and taunt the children who were going to school. He would make paper airplanes out of the school notebooks of his friends. He would go up on the terrace and hit unsuspecting people who were passing by with pellets from his sling.

One day, the old teacher left. A new young teacher came in his place. That day Moru was sitting on the wall watching the children go to school. No one asked him anymore why he did not go with them. Instead, children avoided him because they were afraid that he would bother them.

The teacher was passing by. Moru looked at the teacher. The teacher looked at Moru Neither smiled and neither frowned. The next day, at the same time and the same place, Moru looked down from the wall. The teacher looked up at him and smiled. It was a small smile. Moru jumped from the wall and ran away.

A few days later, the teacher was passing by. He was carrying a huge bag. The bag was very heavy. The teacher was having a difficult time. Moru scratched his head. The teacher passed him by slowly. Moru thought and then he ran behind the teacher. Without saying anything, he took hold of one end of the bag. The teacher was relieved and together they were able to get the heavy load to the school quickly.

Inside the school , the bag was carefully put on the teacher's table. The teacher opened the bag and let Moru look inside. There were many many books, colourful books of all sizes and shapes. They felt shiny and smelt new. “Can you help me to take them out?” asked the teacher.

Moru began bringing out the books. There were books with stories in them, with pictures on the cover. Some were written in large letters. Some books had so much in them that the words had to be squeezed into the pages. Moru felt his excitement rising. He had not touched a book in two years.

The next day, Moru waited till school was over and all the children had left. The teacher was alone. Moru went in quietly and stood by the door. The school seemed ghostly when all the noise and laughter and shouting was gone. The teacher looked up and said, “Good you have come. I need your help.” Moru was curious. What kind of help could the teacher need? He had many, many children in his school to help him. In a very matter of fact kind of voice the teacher said, “Can you help me sort out the books?”

Moru sat on the floor. The books were all around him. There were so many storybooks. He put the animal ones together. The leopard storybook would feel more comfortable with the elephants and camels. The fairytales could sit with the stories about gods and goddesses. The adventure stories sat on their own. Or maybe they should go with the heroes and famous people?

Then came the books with numbers. Moru's eyes and fingers slowed down. The fat numbers danced with the thin ones. Two digits balanced one on top of the other like an unsteady building still waiting for the base to be filled. The multiplication sums looked short and squat and got fatter and fatter at the bottom as the numbers got bigger. Division was just the opposite. You began with a lot and then if you were careful, you worked it down to create a long thin graceful tail. If you were lucky there would be nothing left. One by one all the numbers and their tricks came back to Moru.

It was dark and the school had no lights. “You have to go home now, Moru, but you can come back tomorrow,” said the teacher. “But can you come when the children are here please?” Next day, soon after school started, Moru came. The children were surprised to see him and a little scared. By now Moru was famous as a ‘dada' of the neighbourhood. “I have someone to help me now,” said the teacher. He put Moru with the younger children. There were books in which the children were supposed to write. “Please, can you help the children arrange these numbers in ascending and descending order?” The little kids scrambled around Moru; they were amazed that a tough fellow like Moru knew so much.

Moru made the children stand in a line - the smallest children at one end and the tallest ones at the other end. He gave them numbers to hold. Now it was easy. Just like with short children and tall children, it is easy to know who to put where, it was the same with the numbers. Every day Moru would come for a little while and every day the teacher would give him a bigger and bigger task to do. Every day he found his love for numbers was getting stronger and every day his excitement and skill was being absorbed by the little children.

One month later, Moru's mother was looking for him in the middle of the morning. He was nowhere to be found. She looked on the terrace but he was not there. She looked on the wall where he normally sat dangling his feet, but only his kites were resting there.

She looked up on the mango tree, the leaves rustled in the breeze but there was no Moru on the branches. She went to the market but all the vegetable sellers were selling their vegetables without being bothered by the usual gang of boys. Finally, she walked down the lane and happened to look into the window of the school.

There was Moru. His head was down, and he was looking carefully into his notebook. There was a frown of concentration on his forehead and a deep look of absorption in his eyes. He was busy solving complicated mathematics problems along with all the other children of his age. The teacher looked out too, and he smiled his soft warm smile at Moru's mother. She smiled back happily. Moru was in school again. This time he was learning more and more. And most importantly, this time he was loving it.


# Kallu's World 1 - In Big Trouble Again!

“Kallu get up! You'll get late for school again! KALLOOO!” The urgent voice pierced through a lovely dream in which Kallu and his friend Damu were catching a huge fish in the river, and for some strange reason the fish was smiling at them. Kallu pushed a bleary face out of his quilt and protested sleepily, “Shabbo it's too early! I hardly slept!” “No, it isn't,” his brother Shabbo said firmly. “The sun came up long ago. Ammi has already milked the buffalo and we've all had breakfast.” Kallu sat up shivering and looked out of the window and mumbled, “Sun? I don't see any sun.” “That's the mist you idiot! Abbu has already gone to work in the vegetable field and all the school kids of our mohalla went past long ago.” “Everyone's gone?” Kallu about to yawn swallowed it in panic. “Even Munia?” Shabbo nodded silently, his face looking really gloomy. “BAAP RE!” Throwing back the quilt, Kallu struggled out of bed. He couldn't get late for school again! He just couldn't! Two days earlier, Masterji had threatened that one more late entrance in class and the punishment would get really serious. He was even thinking of not promoting him to the next class. And that too after he made Kallu stand in a corner holding his ears for hours and hours. “I have to think up a story right now!” Kallu thought desperately as he hunted for his chappals under the bed. “A really wonderful, heartbreaking, very convincing story...” He rushed at super speed to get ready, like he did every morning. He quickly splashed some freezing water on his face to really open his eyes, no bath of course. Luckily it was winter or his mother would have made him take one. He grabbed a shirt, trousers and sweater and hopped about putting them on. Shoving his feet into his chappals, he looked at his younger brother and panted, “You're so lucky Shabbo! No school for a whole month!” Shabbo sitting by the window, his right leg covered in plaster, said grimly, “Sure! Breaking a leg is great fun. I love sitting here all day, getting so bored I could tear out my hair, while you go off with Damu to play football. Zaroor, I'm having fun!” By the time he finished speaking, Kallu was already out of the house and half way down the lane. Shabbo leaned out of the window to watch his hurrying figure vanish through the swirling mist. Then a huge delighted grin slowly spread across his face. “He's gone!” Shabbo sang out. “You can come out Munia!” His sister Munia who had been hiding behind a cupboard, came out with an even bigger smile on her face. They were laughing so much that Munia got an attack of hiccups. On his way out, Kallu had grabbed a dry chapati from the kitchen and now taking a bite he mumbled to himself, “A story Kallan Mian! A very convincing, brand new story or you're standing in the corner again.” Life was a mystery to Kallu. He liked school, he really did. He enjoyed doing sums and learning science, he loved playing football and singing in the school programmes. But then why, oh why, did he find it so hard to get to school on time? Even Masterji couldn't really understand it.

He had suggested sarcastically that Kallu should start sleeping in the school veranda at night, and all the other kids in his class had laughed at Kallu. The problem was that things were getting serious now. If Masterji really did not promote him to class nine, then he was in deep trouble because then his Abbu would make him leave school and make him work in the vegetable fields. Who wanted to pull up spinach and collect carrots and peas when he could go to school? School was a hundred times more fun and he knew that if he could pass the twelfth class board exam, he could find a good job, may be even go to college! Going to college... ah! That was Kallu's biggest dream. What Kallu really wanted to do, was to complete his twelfth class and then learn about computers.

Masterji said he had the brains to do that. Last month, he had taken their class to a computer show in the nearby town and they all thought the machines were totally amazing! The salesman had shown him the correct way to use the mouse and how you could go into the Internet. That was absolute magic! Now Kallu and Damu wanted to become magicians with the mouse, going zip-zap across the computer screen. On the way back in the bus, he and Damu had worked out a fantastic plan. Now that the new highway went past Khajuria village, they would open a dhaba-cum-STD booth-cum-computer centre right beside it. Damu, who dreamed of food all the time would run the dhaba, and Kallu would manage the STD booth. Truck drivers would eat at the dhaba and call home from the STD booth and the people from all the nearby villages sending vegetables, wheat and sugarcane to the wholesale market, could check out the latest market prices on the Internet. “Kya baat! ‘Damodar Dhaba and Kallan Computer Centre'.” Damu smiled and then turned to give Kallu an anxious glance, “If only you would get to school on time.” Whizzing past the tea shop, still munching the chapati, Kallu yelled, “Salaam Dharam Chacha!” Dharampal, the chai shop owner, looked up from the boiling kettle and gave a surprised look, “Arrey it's Kallu!” Then his grin widened as his eyebrows shot up, “What's the matter? Did the sun rise from the west today? Where are you going so early in the morning?” “Schooooool!” “Have a pakora first!” And he laughed. “Garam garam Dharam ke pakorey!” Hurrying along Kallu had no time to reply. Dharampal Chacha jokes about everything, he grumbled to himself. Here Kallu was in serious trouble and he was talking about silly pakoras. What was so funny about Kallu getting late for school anyway? It happened every week!

Of course, the most disastrous was when he arrived late, day before yesterday. There was a rehearsal for the 26th January programme and when he crept into the school courtyard, they were already singing “Jaiya he!” of the National Anthem. And Kallu was supposed to be there in front with Damu, Munia and Saru leading the singing. So he stood at the back, sang “Jaiya he!” and was trying to sneak off to class when someone grabbed him by the collar and hauled him back. His heart nearly stopped as he looked up at Masterji's grim face. “You are again late for rehearsals, so you're out of the show.” Masterji's voice was cold as ice. “Oh no! Please Masterji!” Kallu had tears in his eyes and these were real tears, not the ones he could bring out at will. He really wanted to be part of the show. “Please... please...” he pleaded desperately. “I promise I won't be late again.” “Fine.” Masterji's voice softened a bit. “I'll let you go this time, but one more late mark and you're out! Get that?” Kallu nodded with a sniff. By then they had reached Kallu's classroom and as Kallu headed to his seat, he said, “Where are you going? Stand in the corner, holding your ears.” His classmates had already begun to giggle when Masterji came up with the final, terrible threat, “May be I won't promote you. Kallan - failed in eighth because of late marks!” And now he was late again. His life was over. A good story... thought Kallu ...a really credible excuse. He had come up with so many in the past, why couldn't he think of a new one today? In his mind's eye, he could see Masterji frown in disbelief looking down at Kallu, as he stood stammering and stuttering away. He was concentrating so hard on his story, he ran straight into a herd of buffaloes. Just my luck, he thought in disgust, dodging the mooing cattle. In a life threatening crisis like this, what do I do? I crash into Badri and his fat buffaloes. Puffing and panting, slithering through the mud, he struggled through. Badri, the mad buffalo man in his huge turban, waved a stick in greeting and smiled behind his bushy moustache. “Aren't you early Kallu? Why don't you help me wash the buffaloes and then go to school?” “Are you joking?” “No. I'll give you five rupees. There's time, you're early.” “Sure, I'm early,” muttered Kallu irritated. “I'm so early it's not even today yet, it's still yesterday. And I'll also feed your buffaloes and dance with them.” “Heh! Heh!” Badri laughed as he slapped a buffalo on the rump. “You're really funny Kallan!” Kallu kept running. The whole village is against me, he thought gloomily, even crazy Badri.

Can't they stop joking and teasing a poor boy like me? And then he got busy with the story-cum-excuse problem once again. Ammi was sick and he had to make breakfast? Nope. He'd tried that one at least twice before. It won't work again. The goat had run away? Nah! It didn't work last time. Someone stole his pen? The pen was right there in his school bag. His chappals broke and he had to get them repaired? No way! They were brand new. Going past Damu's house, he saw his best friend and his sister Saru sitting on a charpai in the courtyard, eating breakfast. Ha! They were late too, Kallu thought in triumph, and they are still eating, so they'll come in after me, and hopefully Masterji will be so busy yelling at them, he'll forget about me. Damu looked up, his eyes wide in surprise, “Oye Kallu! Wait for me yar!” “Paranthas, Kallu Bhaiya,” Saru called out. “Gobhi paranthas!” “No time!” Kallu huffed past at full speed. “Meet you in school.” “Theek hai. See you later.” Damu shrugged and went back to eating. Damu and Saru are so lucky, Kallu thought. They lived right next to school. They could even leave home when the school bell rang. As he got to the school gate, Kallu's heart began to thud really fast. Guess who was standing there, stuffing a paan into his mouth. Masterji!! Talk of bad luck! Kallu skated to a stop, and began in a nervous rush, “I'm sorry I'm late Masterji, but today it's not my fault at all! I had to help Shabbo take a bath. You know he's broken his leg and...” he came to a sudden stop because of an amazing sight. Masterji, the scariest human being on earth, was laughing! “Wait!” Masterji held up a hand, while he tried to stop from choking on his paan. “Why are you telling me a new story today?” “What story?” Kallu tried hard to look shocked. “I never tell stories... I mean... but...” Things are getting very strange here, thought Kallu. “Every word is hundred percent true, Masterji!” “You are nearly fifteen minutes early Kallan,” Masterji's smile still lingered. “EARLY?” Kallu froze in shock. “WHAT DO YOU MEAN EARLY?” Masterji pointed to his watch, “See? Seven forty five.” “Munia's not here?” “No one's here yet.” And Masterji laughed again, sending out a spray of paan juice into the air. “No one except you!” Kallu stood still, “You mean I could have slept more? I had time for breakfast?” He nodded to himself. “Now I know. It's Shabbo and Munia. I'll kill them. I really will. Just because Shabbo is bored he's played this trick on me.” "And you wasted a good story too,” Masterji said sympathetically. “Better come in anyway.” “I'll make Shabbo pay for this,” Kallu said through gritted teeth. “I really will.” “What will you do?” “I'll break his other leg!!” said Kallu with a glare.


# Monkey Business on Stage - Kallu's World 2

Khajuria village was suffering from Ramlila fever. It was nothing new, as Kallu said, they got it every year. The fever usually started a month before Dussehra. As the low, dark grey monsoon clouds drifted away and the sky turned a glittering blue, there were festivities in the air and everyone began talking about Masterji and the Ramlila. Everywhere in the village, at Dharampal's chai shop, in the vegetable fields, at the grocery store, in Moti Dadi's courtyard and at the tube-well, there was a single question being asked. “What is Masterji planning to do this year?” Kallu often said admiringly, “Masterji is the producer, director, scriptwriter and music composer of Ramlila and only he knows what we will see this year.”

Masterji was the head of the village school and the Khajuria Ramlila Party that put up a fantastic show every year. Of course, they couldn't do the whole Ramayana because that was a very long story, and Khajuria did not have enough actors. So Masterji had written the dialogues of some of the most important scenes, and he would pick a few of them to enact for a week before Dussehra. So Khajuria never knew which scenes they would see. A tent was put up in a corner of the field where Badri, the milkman kept his buffaloes. A stage was built with a bunch of wobbly folding tables they got from Jai Bhagwan's Tent House. The audience sat on the ground on durries and nowadays, as the village had electricity, they had both gas lamps and electric bulbs to light up the stage. From the first day, Kallu and his gang were hanging around the school building where rehearsals were held, hoping Masterji would give them something to do. In the gang were Kallu, his sister Munia, brother Shabbo and his best friend Damu and his sister Saru. Day after day, they sat and watched the rehearsals, and by the end they knew most of the dialogues by heart. Every year, Masterji would select scenes like the Sita swayamvar with Ram breaking the giant bow; then Kaikeyi and Manthara scheming to send Ram into exile and Dasaratha weeping and dying. Munia's favourite scene was of Laxman cutting off Surpanakha's nose and Ravan kidnapping Sita. Then there was Hanuman setting fire to Lanka, and finally the fantastic battle scenes with Ravan, Kumbhakarna and Meghnad fighting Ram, Laxman, Hanuman and their monkey army.

This year, their begging had paid off and Masterji had let Kallu, Damu and Shabbo play monkeys in the vanar sena. They were acting in the final battle scene and had to wear shorts, have monkey face make-up and long tails. It was amazing fun as they jumped about waving tin maces and swords. It made the girls, Munia and Saru very envious. “It's sooo silly!” Saru said grimly as they headed for the school one morning. “Why can't girls act in the Ramlila?” “Did you see ‘Sita' last night?” Munia asked. “That boy studies in Kallu Bhaiya's class and he's starting to get a moustache...” “And his voice kept cracking,” Saru giggled. “I really think Billo Chachi would be just perfect as Sita.” “Yes she would! Now if her husband Dharam Chacha can play Ram, why can't she be Sita?” “She even asked Masterji, but he said that the Khajuria panchayat would stop the Ramlila if he took real women. Dhat!” Saru shook her head in disgust. “Anyway, tonight's Badri Bhaiya's big scene!” Munia gave a small skip of happiness. “I can't wait!” For Kallu and his gang, the best actor in the show was Badri, the mad buffalo man who always played Hanuman. He was short and stocky, had a head of unruly hair, a bushy moustache, big round eyes and a booming voice. So when he was on stage, strutting about yelling out his lines, even Ram and Laxman faded into the background. According to Kallu and his gang, the scene where Hanuman exchanges insults with Ravan and then sets Lanka on fire was an absolute super-hit scene. Masterji had written such fantastic dialogues for Ravan and Hanuman that the audience was totally hypnotized and listened to every word in breathless silence. That evening, the gang was among the earliest to arrive at the tent. Badri's buffaloes were tied nearby and according to Damu, they had to do ‘high jumps' over the pats of buffalo dung. “Second row from the front, middle of the row. Perfect!” said Shabbo, settling down on the durrie with a happy sigh. “Well, tomorrow we won't need the seats,” said Kallu, giving Munia and Saru a sneaky grin. “We boys will be on stage.” “Hah!” Munia shook her curly head. “All you do is jump around like idiots, and none of you have a single line to say.” “And Shabbo will be killed by Meghnad and just lie there flat on his back, like a log of wood,” added Saru with a giggle. “Do you know it takes real acting to play dead?” Shabbo asked hotly. “I have to breathe very, very slowly and keep my eyes shut tight!” “You'll get the award for the best dead monkey in Khajuria!” Damu grinned. As the sun set, the tent began to fill up. Backstage was a hive of activity, with everyone putting on their costumes and slapping on make-up. Dharampal was free tonight, as Ram did not appear in the scene, so he was busy doing the Hanuman make-up on Badri's face. “I wish you would shave off your moustache Badri,” he said. “It looks really odd. Hanuman on TV and films is always clean-shaven.” “Colour it brown and no one will know,” growled Badri. “I am NOT shaving it! FORGET IT!!” Then he held the sheets of dialogue before his face, squinted and grumbled, “Why does Masterji keep changing the dialogues every year?” “He's an artist and all artists are crazy anyway. This year in the Bharat milap scene, he wanted Ram and Bharat to sing a song,” said Dharampal. “A song?” repeated Badri. “Yes. It went - bhai bhai ka pyar amar rahe... something... something...” Dharampal laughed. “But you can't sing!” said Badri. “Exactly! And neither can Lattu, who's playing Bharat! He tried for two days to make us sing and then gave up. Thank God!” said Dharampal. Suddenly, Badri sat up and yelled at the top of his voice, making Dharampal jump, “Masterji! Masterji!” “Kya hua?” Masterji came running in a panic. “You wrote a song for Ram but not for Hanuman? And I can sing!” said Badri. “Arrey Badri!” Masterji stuffed a paan into his mouth, “Hanuman does not sing.” “And what will you sing anyway?” asked Dharampal carefully painting Badri's nose a bright red. “Hanuman-Ravan ki dushmani amar rahe?” “Heh... heh... ho... ho...” Masterji walked away laughing, spraying paan juice in the air. As Dharampal began to attach the tail to Badri's bright yellow shorts, nobody noticed the thoughtful look on Badri-Hanuman's brown face...

An hour later, the curtains were dragged away to reveal Ravan's royal durbar in Lanka, and it looked really gorgeous with carpets, curtains and thrones, all supplied by Jai Bhagwan's tent house. Jai Bhagwan was playing Kumbhakarna because he was the fattest man in the village. The scene was going beautifully and the audience was absorbed in the action. Ravan was being played by Chhotey Lal, the village wrestler and Mandodari by Narain, who was in class ten, wearing a pink and gold sari. Ravan looked really threatening with his rippling muscles, bushy eyebrows, curling moustache and big eyes. The only problem was that Chhotey wasn't very good at remembering the dialogues. “Masterji really struggled to make Chhotey remember his lines,” Damu whispered. “He mixes up everything.” “And then Masterji solved the problem!” Kallu grinned. The others turned to look at him, “How?” “Watch Narain's lips, he's prompting Chhotey. Masterji made him learn the lines of both Mandodari and Ravan!” whispered Kallu. “Sooo clever!” breathed Munia in admiration. “Here he comes!” said Saru with an excited wriggle as Hanuman was dragged on to the stage by the rakshasas. They leaned forward, eyes glued to Hanuman, who was all tied up in thick ropes but stood defiantly tall, glaring angrily at Ravan. “Who is this?” Mandodari whispered to Chhotey, prompting away. “Umm...” Ravan bent his head towards her, listened and then said loudly, “Who is this?” A rakshasa stepped forward, “We caught him in the Ashokavan, Maharaj! He was talking to Devi Sita.” “What...” prompted Mandodari. “WHAT!” shouted Ravan springing up, suddenly remembering the rest of his lines, “How did he get inside? What was he doing there?” and he waved his arms in rage. Munia gave a soft giggle, and then as other people spotted Ravan's face, the rest of the audience also began to laugh. As he was waving his arms, Ravan had dislodged one end of his false moustache, and now it was dangling over his lips like a black earthworm. From where he sat, Kallu could see Masterji in the wings frantically waving his arms and pointing to Ravan's face. About to start his lines, Hanuman turned to look at the audience in surprise. This was a serious scene. What was making them laugh? “Kya hua?” he asked, peering into the dark. “Why are you laughing?” “Ravan's moustache is falling off, Badri Bhaiya!” someone kindly informed him from the back. “Oh ho! Sorry!” Ravan jumped nervously and quickly fixed the moustache back in place, and then turned a sweaty face towards Mandodari, “What do I say next?” In his panic he forgot to whisper, and everyone began to laugh again. In the wings, Masterji was chewing his paan faster and faster... “Tell me who you are... you thieving monkey!” Mandodari prompted. “What?” Ravan was still a bit flustered. “Theek! Tell me who you are... you thieving monkey!” And he finally turned to address Hanuman, “Where have you come from?” “Here it comes!” Shabbo leaned forward eagerly, “My favourite dialogue.” Masterji had written some of the important dialogues in rhyme, and the bit where Hanuman introduces himself to Ravan was the best poetry Shabbo had ever heard. And Badri's acting was always quite superb! He would stand tall, thump his chest and ask angrily, “Thieving monkey? Who are you to call me that? Do you know who I am?” and then turning to face the audience, he would launch into the poem that Shabbo knew by heart... Main hooon Ramji ka chela Main hoon Hanuman albela Tu hai Ravan balwaan Kar du tujhko pareshan Then he would pause dramatically, thump his chest again and say in ringing tones... Main hoon pavan putra Hanumaaan! As they waited breathlessly, Hanuman glared at Ravan and shouted, “Do you know who I am?” He turned to face the audience, cleared his throat and suddenly Badri began to sing! Main hoooon Ramjiii kaaa chelaaa... “He's SINGING?” Saru's eyes were wide with shock. Main hoon... Hanumaaan... albelaaa... Hanuman sang on... “He's good!” Kallu was laughing in delight. “Badri Bhaiya can really sing.” In the wings, Masterji was standing absolutely still, as if struck by lightning. He was staring at his star actor as Badri sang away, and in shock he had forgotten to chew his paan. Badri sang, eyes raised to the roof and one arm raised like a filmi hero. His tune had a nice rhythm, and the audience began to clap, and even Narain forgot he was on stage and joined in.

One rakshasa was swaying his hips in a really funny dance. Badri began to smile, and with a happy shake of his head, he decided to sing the whole song once again! As he got to the last line, he waved to the crowd to join in and then sang out, Main hoon pavan putra... And the audience joined in a loud shout, Hanumaaaan! From the field outside, Badri's loyal buffaloes joined in the chorus, “Mooo! Moooooo!” As they headed for home tiredly, Kallu declared with a huge, happy sigh, “What a super-hit Ramlila!”


# The Lantern Queen

I parked myself right under the big orange lantern and asked, “Do I look like a Lantern Queen?” I waited for exactly three minutes. To my dismay, no one replied. Rajjo was really busy in a deep conversation. “Rajjo, Rajjo, Rajjo, Rajjo!” I yelled. She finally tore away from the deep discussion and looked at me. “Do I look like a lantern queen?” I asked, again. “You're mad.” said Rajjo. She looked away and promptly got back to her seemingly important discussion. I now turned to Shriya. Surprisingly she was already staring at me. “Can you see how I'm letting that question just pass?” she said with her sharp eyebrow raised. Sigh! The life of a Lantern Queen is going to be difficult; I thought and looked at Shruti. Shruti was also already staring at me. But she had an I-am-observing-you look all over her face. After a close examination she finally said, “You look more like you have a jelly fish on your head.” “So, I'm the Jelly Fish Queen?” I asked. “Not a queen really...” said Shruti. “So a layperson with a jelly fish on the head?” I confirmed. “Yes.” she said. “Oh! Okay.” I said and sat down. What does Shruti know about the Lantern Queen, I thought. They are all jealous. They don't want to acknowledge the fact that I am now the Lantern Queen. It had to be! It is not every day that a huge lantern appears right about your head. It had to mean something. And I knew exactly what it meant. Only these guys were being oblivious to the facts. I decided that I had to leave for the day. I now had the responsibility of being the Lantern Queen. I looked at my watch and saw it was almost 6.00 in the evening. So I started packing up. I knew being the Lantern Queen was not going to be easy. I had to open up my mind and think profound thoughts. I had to let the light come in. As I walked to the station, I saw a lady running behind a taxi. This was a rather common site in the mad Mumbai city. But today, I pushed myself to look beyond the obvious and find the real meaning hidden behind this scene. What am I missing? There had to be something, I thought. Think like the Lantern Queen! I told myself. Then, out of nowhere, it came to me. I figured that running behind anything in life was a complete waste of energy. Running behind marks as a student, behind money as an adult, was all futile. So, I took a conscious call. If the thing I want can walk with me at my pace, then it's going to be worth the effort. If I have to keep running behind something, then it is simply not going to be sustainable. For how long will I keep running? And anyways, I didn't enjoy running much. After this great analysis, I felt really enlightened. I had opened up my mind and this role-play was now becoming really interesting. So with a spring in my step, I marched on towards the station. I was carefully looking left to cross the road when a cabbie came by in full speed and splashed a whole lot of muck over my jeans. If this were yet another day, I would have started running behind the cabbie while showering him with all the curse words I knew of. But today, I kept my cool. I let him go and thought, why did this happen? This time, the bulb in my head didn't go on. So, I did the most fun thing I could do in that moment. I walked right into that puddle of muck and jumped up and down till my whole top was dirty as well. By the time I was out, I saw a million eyes staring at me. But, I didn't feel embarrassed. I was now the Lantern Queen, and they didn't know that the Lantern Queen could do anything. I picked up my pace once again and walked towards the station. Once I got onto my platform, I saw the most miraculous sight. Slowly pulling in was a 12-coach train that was completely empty! For a city dweller, this situation is worthy of great emotions. I could feel a surge of emotions swell in me. I was elated beyond words. I promptly stepped into the train and made myself comfortable for the ride back home. Train journeys back home were my most favourite part of the day. I could feel the stress release my system. This was also my thinking time. And so, I put my thinking cap on. I pondered on what would the Lantern Queen do in this valuable free time? I didn't have to think too long, as a fellow passenger soon gave me the answer by throwing a bag full of garbage out of the window. I gently got up and sat next to that lady and told her, “Aunty, please don't throw things out of the window.” “Why not?” she asked almost confused. “Cause it can result in the spread of many diseases, aunty! If you have thrown some kind of food, then it will encourage the rodents and rats on the tracks. It is not at all hygienic.” I said. “Is it? I didn't think of the outcome when I threw the bag outside. I have seen everyone do it, so I do it out of habit now.” explained the lady. “Now you know better, no? So next time please wait till the platform comes? There are dustbins there!” I said. “Okay, I will listen to you young lady. We must change with the times.” said the aunty. We both exchanged really wide smiles and I felt really proud of myself. I was shaken out of my thoughts when I heard the voice of the announcer announcing that the next destination was my station. I dusted my outfit a little and got up. The Lantern Queen now had to face her mother. This I knew was going to be a tough one. After a quick auto ride from station to home, I found myself standing outside the door of my house. I was a little worried now. My clothes were costly. I didn't want to be greeted by an angry mother. So again, I forced myself to think like the Lantern Queen. And the bulb in my head did flicker, but it came right on. I quickly rummaged my bag for the house key. I knew I had it in there somewhere. Soon enough, I found it. I opened the door and ran into my room. “Hi Maa! I'm home,” I yelled as I crossed my parent's room. By the time my mom came to see what was up, I was safely inside my bathroom. “What are you doing inside?” enquired a suspicious mother. “Ma! I am taking a bath!” I yelled. “Why?” continued the suspicious mother. “Because I feel like it Ma! I'm all sweaty.” “Okay. I will see you at the dinner table. Be quick.” she ended. I knew well that she was not convinced. Mothers have this instinct. They just know everything. But this time I had escaped because I was the Lantern Queen. I washed my clothes squeaky clean and realised that a mistake is not really a mistake if one can undo it. When I came out, mom was at the table. She had made hot soup with fried bread. I was so hungry that I gulped down two bowl-fulls. By the end of it all, my full stomach was making me really drowsy. “Can I go to sleep, ma?” I asked her. “Are you sure everything is fine? Don't you want to share some office gossip today?” she asked. “Yes ma! All is fine! I promise. I'm just sleepy.” I said. “Fine, go to sleep. But you have to catch-up with me tomorrow.” she said before I pecked her on the cheek and headed straight to bed. When I felt the warmth of the sun on my face, I knew it was morning. I opened my eyes and saw that I was up much before the alarm. This came as a pleasant surprise. I felt like a true queen in her chamber. I got off the bed with great grace and poise. I decided I will wear the royal purple and picked out my clothes from the wardrobe. In no time, I was ready. I went to my parent's room to find both of them happily chatting away over a cup of tea. “Good morning from the queen!” I announced before I walked in. “But aren't you our princess?” asked dad puzzled. “Dad, I am multitasking!” I replied. “Ahh, ok your highness.” replied dad. With dad, it was always like this. No questions asked. Just go with the flow. I had a quick cup of tea with them discussed the beautiful weather. As soon I was done with my cup, I took off for work. The Lantern Queen was never late, I knew that. My journey to work went as smooth as my morning. It flowed like a calm stream of the river. No jerks, no breaks, no peaks, no falls. No extremes. I reached office a little before time. I punched-in and walked towards my team. With an air of superiority, I went and sat at my desk. I put on the computer and looked up at my lantern. What I saw now, shook me. The lantern was gone! It was gone? I didn't understand the meaning of this. I stood up to see where it had moved. I stared at the receptionist with great anger. My lantern was right above her head. “Who did that?” I asked Shruti, pointing towards the lantern. “Must be of office boys. They are the ones in charge of the Diwali decorations, no? They must have moved it.” “But, it was right above my head yesterday!” I complained. “Yes, but now it is above the reception desk where everyone can see it and feel the Diwali feel!” said Shruti putting some sense in the discussion. I turned away from her and sat down. This was very upsetting. Was I the Lantern Queen just for a day? I didn't want to stop being the Lantern Queen. I was enjoying each and every minute of it. This was depressing. There had to be a way out. “Purvi, will you please come here?” called out my editor. Like an obedient zombie, I got up and walked towards her desk. “You know we are coming up with our Diwali Special issue, right?” she asked “Yes ma'am.” I replied. “So here is something that is going to make your day brighter. You have to come up with a fictional character and its story. We will carry this as a continuing series in the magazine till Diwali. This character has to talk about the festivities that are seen in the city right before the actual festival. Like a build-up, you know?” My mind was racing now. “Yes, I get it.” “This is quite a big opportunity for an intern, Purvi. You are getting it because the rest of the team has their hands full already. And if you get this right, we might consider you for a permanent employee too.” said my editor. “Ma'am, umm, uh, err. Can this character be called the Lantern Queen?” I asked with all hope. My editor fell silent for a few seconds. I could feel my heart beat pick up. I was sure it was audible to everyone else too now. “Lantern Queen?” she asked, “Hmm. Okay, that does have a ring to it. Quickly write your character sketch and treatment and send it across to me. Let's get this working.” she concluded. What! Did I just hear that right? This had to be the best day of my life! It was right then I realised that, by appearing above my head the previous day, the lantern had changed something. Its light had touched me and transformed me for life. It had ensured that I could not only be the Lantern Queen forever, but also write about it publically! Somewhere deep down inside, I just knew this was my very own big break. This Diwali was going to be full of lights, laughter and happiness. The End


# The Boy and the Drum

This play is based on a modern form of theatre called Body Theatre. The beauty of this form is that it can be done impromptu, at any place, with as many or as few actors as convenient, with or without props. You will find suggestions on how to perform this play at the end of the book. And now the play! The Boy and the Drum Narrator/s (stepping out to one corner of the stage): A poor woman had a son. She worked hard as a gardener in wealthy houses in their town. They gave her some grain in return. One child mimes the mother, while other children form groups of the well-to-do families. The mother goes to each group and mimes gardening for these groups. Having created this 30-second scene, all the groups, including the mother freeze in their positions. Narrator: But she felt bad because she could never afford to buy nice clothes or lovely toys for her son. A young boy comes running through the chorus, singing a song and playing mime cricket. He freezes with a pose at the centre of the stage. Narrator: The little lad was bright and cheerful. Not having any toys or nice clothes did not bother him. After a hard day's work, the mother was going to the market to sell the grain she had received. The mother steps towards the boy and the rest of the frozen actors go back to the chorus. Narrator: She asked her son: Mother: What can I get for you from the market, little one?

Narrator: Now the boy was fascinated with the sound of a drum. So he said: Boy: A drum, mother, I would love to have a drum to play with. During the following narration, the boy continues to be frozen in his position while the mother circles the stage. She meets one actor who steps out of the chorus as the merchant to whom she sells the grain, another from whom she buys flour, and on the way she picks up a piece of wood, and goes back to the boy. Narrator: The mother knew she would never have enough money to buy a drum for her son. She went to the market, sold her grain and bought some gram flour and some salt. While returning home, she felt sad that she would have to face him empty-handed. So when she saw a nice piece of wood on the road, she picked it up and brought it home. The son did not know what to do with the piece of wood. Yet he happily carried it with him when he went out to play. A happy song sprang to his lips and he went along singing it: Boy moves around the stage while chorus watches him. Boy: Tum-ti-tee Tum-ti-tee-Tum-ti-tee-Tum-ti-tee- Tum-ti-tee- Tum-ti-tee Tot Tum-ti-tee Tum-ti-tee-Tum-ti-tee-Tum-ti-tee- Tum-ti-tee- Tum-ti-tee Tot! I asked for a drum and look what I got, A lovely piece of wood! I asked for a drum and look what I got, I think my luck is good! Tum-ti-tee Tum-ti-tee-Tum-ti-tee-Tum-ti-tee- Tum-ti-tee- Tum-ti-tee Tot Tum-ti-tee Tum-ti-tee-Tum-ti-tee-Tum-ti-tee- Tum-ti-tee- Tum-ti-tee Tot!

Towards the end of the song, an old man emerges from the chorus. He mimes trying to light his stove. As he coughs, the entire chorus coughs, thus amplifying the effect of his condition. Narrator: And as he went skipping along on his way, he came across an old man. The old man was trying to light his stove using some cow-dung cakes. The fire was not catching and there was smoke all around. The smoke made the man's eyes water and he was coughing. The little boy ran up to him and said: Boy: What is the matter Grandpa? Can I help you in any way? Old Man: Ah! Little one, I am trying to cook some food, but I am unable to start a fire.

For you see, My fire will just not start I need to cook. Oh! Take a look My fire will never start! Can somebody start this fire? My eyes are red, my arms are tired. I need to eat, I need some food. Oh! For a dry piece of wood! Boy: Here, Grandpa, you can use my piece of wood to start your fire. The following actions are mimed as the narrator speaks. Narrator: The old man was very pleased. He lit his fire, made some bread and gave a piece to the boy. The old man steps back into the chorus. The boy skipped along singing his song: Boy: La-la-la-la- La-la-la-la- La-la-la-la- LaLa-la-la-la- La-la-la-la- La-la-la-la- La! My piece of wood got me some food. A lovely piece of bread. My piece of wood is not a drum, but it Got me bread. A lovely piece of bread. La-la-la-la- La-la-la-la- La-la-la-la- LaLa-la-la-la- La-la-la-la- La-la-la-la- La! Narrator: The boy walked on till he came upon a potter's wife. She had her baby in her arms. The baby was wailing and flailing her arms. As before, the potter's wife emerges from the chorus, as if with a baby in her arms. While the mother tries to pacify the baby, the chorus hums a lullaby softly. This lullaby can be a regional song. The boy said: Boy: Dear lady, why is your daughter crying? Potter's Wife: My little one is hungry. She has not had anything to eat since morning. I cannot give her anything as there is nothing in the house. I wish I had some bread to give her. Narrator: The kind hearted boy gave the lady his bread. She gave the bread to her child who ate it eagerly and stopped crying. She was so pleased with the boy that she gave him a large pot. The above actions are mimed as the narrator voices the lines. After the action, the woman with the baby goes back to the chorus while the boy continues, carrying his pot. The boy went along humming his funny song: Boy: Tum-ti-tee Tum-ti-tee-Tum-ti-tee-Tum-ti-tee- Tum-ti-tee- Tum-ti-tee Tot Tum-ti-tee Tum-ti-tee-Tum-ti-tee-Tum-ti-tee- Tum-ti-tee- Tum-ti-tee Tot! I gave my bread away and Look what I got! I gave my bread away and Got a lovely pot! Tum-ti-tee Tum-ti-tee-Tum-ti-tee-Tum-ti-tee- Tum-ti-tee- Tum-ti-tee Tot Tum-ti-tee Tum-ti-tee-Tum-ti-tee-Tum-ti-tee- Tum-ti-tee- Tum-ti-tee Tot!

Narrator: The little boy skipped along until he came upon a strange scene at the river bank. The chorus can move their hands all together, symbolizing the flowing river. The washerman and his wife emerge from the chorus, arguing in mime. Their actions are exaggerated but their voices are not heard. A washerman was quarreling loudly with his wife. The boy stopped and asked: Boy: Dear Sir, what is the matter? Why are you quarreling with your wife? Narrator: The washerman said: Washerman: You see, son, it was like this, I gave her a pot, I gave her a pot. And what did she do? I gave her a pot, it cost a lot. She went and broke it too!

She broke the pot, the last of my lot, And now I feel so sore! I gave her the pot, the pot she broke. The pot I need to boil my clothes. Without the pot, my clothes will rot. Oh, they will remain soiled! So you see, I have nothing to boil my clothes in before I wash them. And because of her, my trade will suffer. Boy: Dear Sir, don't quarrel with your wife. Please take this pot of mine and use it. Narrator: The washerman was very happy with the pot. He was so pleased with the boy's good nature that he gave him a nice coat in return. The entire chorus praises the coat, ‘Wah, what a nice coat! Look at the colour! Seems very cozy! So soft and warm!' The washerman and his wife make their way back to the chorus.

The boy ran along singing his funny song. Boy: As I walked along, With my pot in hand, I met a washerman. Who gave me this coat so grand! Oh so funny indeed! People looking for things, And I have what they need! Narrator: The boy walked on, all the while admiring his grand coat. He soon came to a bridge, and there he was alarmed by what he saw. For the following narration, the chorus makes the sound of a cold wind blowing. A man emerges from the chorus, shivering. He sits down, curled into a ball. A man was shivering in the cold and he was not even wearing a shirt. He seemed to be hurt and was moaning in pain. The boy was very concerned and ran up to the man and said: Boy: You seem to be bleeding, You seem to be hurt! I'll try and get you some help. You also need a coat. Narrator: The boy asked the man how he came to be in such a sorry state. The man said: During the following lines, the action is mimed. A group of actors emerges. They chase another actor (playing the man), corner him, and rob him. Man: I was riding my horse in a hurry. I was riding my horse to the city.

A crowd of thieves, they came and GOT me! They got me down, they got me out. They took my purse, got all my money. I tried to put up a good fight. But they beat me up, they beat me bad. They left me in pain, they left me hurt. They took it all, even my shirt! As the song ends the acting-robber group goes back to the chorus. Narrator: The boy said: Boy: Your need is greater than mine. Please take this coat. It will help you keep warm. Narrator: The man was touched by the little lad's kindness. He thanked the boy profusely and presented him with the big fine horse he was riding. The robbed man goes into the chorus, while the entire chorus mimes the riding of the horse with the sounds. A drum can accompany the rhythm. The chorus mimes the riding on the spot, while the boy rides his horse across the stage. The boy was very happy and led the horse along, singing his song. Boy: Oh so funny indeed! People looking for things, And I have what they need! A man needs a shirt, But all he has is a big fine horse! I gave him my coat, what did I get? His big fine horse, of course! The "horsing" of both the boy and chorus stops. Another group emerges from the chorus. These include the bridegroom, his relatives, and the drummers of the party.

Narrator: As he was walking along with his horse, he came upon a large party of gaily dressed people. They were part of a big wedding party with the bridegroom, and musicians. They seemed ready to go in a wedding procession, but all of them were sitting under a tree with long faces. At this point, both the groom's party and the remaining chorus actors sing a popular wedding song, but in a slow and sad-sounding manner. The boy stopped and asked them what made them look so depressed. The groom's father said: Groom's father: You see, son, it's like this. We are all set to go in the wedding procession. But we need a horse for the groom. The man who was supposed to bring it hasn't turned up, the auspicious hour is almost gone. Narrator: And the groom himself stepped up to the boy and said: Groom: I am the groom. Waiting to see my bride, But I'm stuck in here Just hoping for a ride! I just can't go there on my feet. My horse is late and so is the hour. My guests are all waiting to eat. I'll miss my wedding for sure! So you see, what I need right now is a horse! I need a horse! A really quick horse! Chorus: He needs a horse, he needs a horse! He needs a really fast horse!

Narrator: And so the boy, being helpful as ever, offered his horse to the groom. The groom was very happy and he asked the boy what he could give him in exchange for his horse. The boy looked around among the musicians and quickly spotted the drummer. He said: Boy: A stitch in time they say saves nine. And what indeed did save the day, Was this splendid horse of mine! All I want from you is That fine little drum that you play! Oh, make my dreams come true! Please make my dream come true! The drummer steps forward with his drum, and hands it over to the boy during the following lines.

Narrator: The groom requested the drummer to hand over the drum to the boy. The drummer knew he would easily get enough money to buy himself a brand new drum. He willingly gave his drum away. The groom's actors and everyone else return to the main body of the chorus. All sing the wedding song, but now it is happy and up-tempo. Narrator: The boy rushed home singing his song and playing his new drum. He could not wait to tell his mother how she had helped him to get his drum. The boy and the mother meet at the centre of the stage. Boy: My piece of wood did a lot of good! It got me bread as food. My piece of bread lasted not, But gave me a lovely pot. My pot got me a lovely coat. The coat did help a needy man. I got me a big fine horse to ride. With that horse, I got a groom his bride! So you see it is simple indeed A little bit of give and take, Will a lot of people happy make! So when you meet your friends today, Try and make their day! The last verse is sung again by the entire chorus, which sings and dances around the boy. In the end, the actors all freeze in the positions of the various characters in the play. ----------- Curtain -----------

Stage setting: The boxes below suggest a possible design for the play. Think of each of these boxes as a photograph of a particular scene. You could have the props, costumes, and musical instruments for the play on a bench placed against the back wall, and you could make use of them during the changing of the scenes behind the chorus.

Suggestions for the cast The play can be performed by a cast of six to thirty children. With more children, the role of the narrator and the boy can be assumed by many children, besides the other characters. For a cast of four to six children, the roles of the boy and the mother can be fixed, while the other children can take on the various other roles in the play. The stage directions given in the play are only meant as a suggestion or possibility. Please adapt the play to suit your needs in terms of availability of space (stage, classroom, hall etc.), props, sets and costumes. Possible costumes: Regular comfortable clothes like t-shirts and pants or salwar and kameez, OR school uniform. Possible props: Drum, stick, pot, dupattas, depending on availability. The entire play can also be done without any props, all of which can be mimed. Simple musical instruments: Simple musical instruments can be used or the chorus itself can make the appropriate sounds. Suggested stage directions for a group of about 20 to 30 children. Suggested stage directions for a group of about 20 to 30 children All the children are facing away from the audience in three equal lines. A couple of narrators come in a very dramatic fashion. For example, the two of them can be playing a game of catch and suddenly they look at the audience, welcome them, and speak a little about the play together as a chorus: "The story of the boy and the drum, a story about sharing, a story about values, a story about people and not things." The whole group turns to the audience and shouts out the title as one big chorus. The group stays in the three lines, now facing the audience. From now on, the characters will step out of the chorus to the stage space in front and then back into the chorus when they are done with their part in the play. The mother can wear a colored dupatta, which she gives to the boy when she gives him the piece of wood. All the other characters can also wear dupattas, which they exchange with the boy at the appropriate time. This action can symbolize sharing and giving, although this is not essential to the play's action.


# Long Live Friendship! A Humorous Play for Children

# Cast * Rita * Rakesh * Yash * Sheela * Rohan A gang of friends between the ages of 11 and 14.

* Vikram * Yamdoot * Yamraja * Watchman Vikram - very popular in the gang, captain of their cricket team. Yamdoot - Yamraja's messenger, has been instructed by Yamraja to bring Vikram to him. Yamraja - God of death, but here he is shown to be funny and childish, loves watching TV. Watchman - Stands outside Yamraja's palace and guards it.

# Backstage * Set Design Team * Costume Design Team * Light and Sound Designers * Prop Makers * Chorus

# The making of this play It is great fun to be able to act and direct plays on your own. When Meera Dixit was looking for a contemporary play that could be enjoyable as well as easy to perform by students, she could not find the right one for the situation. So she wrote this play which her students could stage without professional help. It was first staged in 2011 and has been a big hit with students every time it has been performed.

# Designing the costumes for Yamraja and Yamdoot Be creative. Use paper, newspaper, thermacol and other material available in school to create the settings. This play works well with three settings - the garden where the characters first meet, an indoor room, and Yamraja's durbar. Three of the characters need specific costumes, or just headgear and jewellery to set them apart from the other characters. They could wear beaded necklaces and head gear made out of papier mache.

# Music and drama Make up a jingle or a chorus. A few singers could sing these with musical accompaniments from the wings to set the mood for a scene, or to add drama to important moments in the play.

# No permission needed You must have observed that at the end of most plays in books, there is a line that states that you need the permission of the playwright to stage the play. However, to stage this play you need not do so as it is copyright-free. This means you can stage the play as you wish. Feel free to incorporate new ideas.

# Scene 1 When the curtain opens, there are a few children on stage, in a garden setting. They are discussing something. __Rita:__ Hey, have you heard about Vikram? It seems he has malaria. No wonder he had such a high fever! __Rakesh:__ Yes, I heard about it. I spoke to his mother yesterday. She said that he is finally being treated with the right medicines. __Sheela:__ Poor fellow, how on earth is he going to write his exams now? __Yash:__ Silly girl, how can he be a poor fellow? Lucky he can't write the exams. How I envy him! No studying, no tension, no mother breathing down his neck. Just lie there waiting to get better... Poor fellow, my foot. _(Going near Rita)_ Look at me, all I do is study all day. __Rita:__ _(laughs)_ Naturally you have to study all day. How will you pass otherwise, stupid? __Yash:__ Don't you have anything better to do than to pull my leg? Wait till I tell the gang about what you did the other day! You know, she... _(Rita stops him.)_ __Rita:__ Sh! Sh! If you say anything more I will... __Rohan:__ Oh no! The third world war is about to begin. You two never give up, do you? __Yash:__ It's her, she is so.. so.. so... irritating! Just because she studies well she thinks no end of herself. __Rita:__ I don't give up! Ha! It's Yash who starts the fight, not me. __Rohan:__ Stop it, you two! You're worse than kids. Hurry up, don't you remember we have to go and see Vikram? _(Yash and Rita are making faces at one another. All depart from one wing of the stage. Return to the stage from another wing)_.

# Scene 2 _(This is Vikram's home. The children can hear Vikram speaking to an unfamiliar voice. As they enter they can see that Vikram is talking to someone. This person is dressed weirdly, and looks like a mythological character. He is Yamdoot, Yamraj's messenger.)_ __Yamdoot:__ _(Yamdoot is talking to Vikram who is lying on his bed)_ Come on child. I am Yamdoot and you must come with me. _(Takes out something from his pocket.)_ See, it says here clearly that your expiry date has come, my dear. So you will now have to say good bye to the world and come with me to my world.

__Vikram:__ _(Looks confused)_ What do you mean come with me to my world? Who, may I know, has sent you? _(pointing to the paper)_ And what is that? _(Vikram is trying to look at the paper, Yamdoot is trying to pull him out of the bed and all the while gazing at the clock. The children are watching all this and are trying to figure out what is happening)_. __Vikram:__ Hey! What are you doing? Why are you trying to lift me? Listen... __Yamdoot:__ I am Yamdoot, Yamraj's messenger. And, I do not have to listen to you. I only listen to my boss. Understood? Come on, get up! _(looks at his paper)_ We have to leave. Once I hand you over to Yamraj, I have an immediate appointment in Delhi. You see, we Yamdoots are very busy these days. Hey, _(goes very close to Vikram)_ let me tell you something. I love to work overtime, we get paid well for that. But enough is enough. We have to leave now kiddo, too much overtime is not good either. _(He is about to drag Vikram out and leave when the children decide to take action.)_ __Yash:__ _(steps out and stops him)_ Hey, who are you and what are you doing? __Sheela:__ Yes, tell us.... __Rita:__ _(Walks around Yamdoot, looking very official)_ So you call yourself Yamdoot. And where do you think you are taking Vikram? _(Yamdoot has a firm grip on Vikram's hand)_ __Vikram:__ _(looking surprised)_ Hello all of you! __Rakesh:__ Hi! How are you feeling now, Vikram? __Vikram:__ Better, much better. But never mind me. Meet my visitor who calls himself Yamdoot. _(Yamdoot glares)_ He says Yamraj has ordered him to take me to his abode. __Rakesh:__ He is going to take you? Where? _(looks up)_ __Sheila:__ This is too much! __Rohan:__ Yamdoot, whom are you taking with you? Him? _(points to Vikram)_ Without our permission? How dare you! __Yash:__ _(Putting his hand on Yamdoot's shoulder)_ Listen Yambhaiyya. This is Vikram, our best friend and the head of our gang. __Sheela:__ _(Shoving Yash aside)_ Also the captain of our cricket team! __Rakesh:__ All right. So he has malaria. That does not mean that you can pick him up and take him away. __Rita:__ This is simply not acceptable! It's sheer dadagiri! __Rohan:__ This is not dadagiri. This is Yamgiri my dear. Yamgiri! _(By now Yamdoot is thoroughly irritated, and very confused. He is touching his moustache knowing full well that if he does not take Vikram to Yamraj all hell will break loose. The very idea is frightening and he looks worried.)_ __Yash:__ Nothing doing Yambhai. You cannot take Vikram with you and that's final. _(tries to pull Vikram towards him, Yamdoot does likewise.)_ __Yamdoot:__ I am very confused. __Rakesh:__ We can see that. _(laughs)_ Anyway, one thing is definite. Vikram is not going anywhere. Is that clear? __Rohan:__ How can you just take him like that? __Yash:__ You need to have some sense to understand things. _(Yamdoot puts his hands to his head, getting quite angry)_ __Yamdoot:__ Hey Bhagwan! _(Realizes his mistake)_ Yamraj what do I do now? Why don't these kids understand that Vikram has to go with me. Come, we are getting very late. _(Pulls him. Rohan stands in front of them like a shield. Holds on to Yamdoot.)_ __Yamdoot:__ _(Upset)_ What shall I do with you now? __Rohan:__ Whatever you want. I am all yours. __Yash:__ _(Laughs)_ Ya, so what was Rakesh telling you my friend? __Yamdoot:__ Me? __Yash:__ Yes you. __Rohan:__ We were telling you that this is the 21st century and this is India. __Sheela:__ And malaria is not a deadly disease here any longer.

__Rohan:__ Besides, there are medicines available now to cure malaria which Vikram is taking. __Sheela:__ It is only a matter of time before he gets better. Here, look at his medicines _(Drags Yamdoot to the medicines. He is worried.)_ __Vikram:__ Yes, see these are my tablets. And my fever is almost gone. __Rita:__ There you go. He is going to be fit and fine in just a few days. _(Stamps her foot by mistake on Yamdoot's foot.)_ __Yamdoot:__ Awww... __Sheela:__ Anyway, now you know that in India malaria is a curable disease. So how can you take him away? __Rakesh:__ Go find another target. __Yamdoot:__ Ha! How can Vikram get better? _(Takes out the paper)_ Look at the expiry date. It is now. So stop all your nonsense. _(Shoves the kids away.)_ I must leave with him. He has to die. _(The kids start beating Yamdoot)_ __Yash:__ If anybody has to die it is YOU not him. _(pointing to Vikram)_ __Yamdoot:__ Oh god.. please stop beating me! Are your fists made of iron! Oh stop... I'm dying! __Yash:__ Oh, this was just a sample of what is to come. Do you want to see what is in store for you? __Yamdoot:__ No, no! _(in a pitiable voice)_ __Rohan:__ _(Holding Yamdoot)_ Alright. But only on one condition. Vikram goes no where. Or else... _(raised hand)_ __Yamdoot:__ That is not possible. He has to go with me. If I do not produce him in Yamraj's darbar, I will lose my job. How will I run my house then? How expensive things have become... __Sheela:__ Who cares about your job! __Rita:__ Fine. If you insist on taking Vikram, you can. __Yamdoot:__ Really? _(eyes lit up)_ __Rakesh:__ Yes, but only on one condition. If you take him you have to take all of us too... __Sheela:__ ...as we want to meet this Yamraj. __Rakesh:__ Yes, we want to meet him. Who is he to decide that just because Vikram has malaria he must be taken away? _(They all surround Yamdoot shouting slogans. By now Yamdoot is at his wit's end. He knows that now he has no choice.)_ __Chorus:__ Down with bullies! Down, down bullies! __Yamdoot:__ Ok, let's all go. But please stop hitting me. See how red my cheeks have become! Let Yamraj decide what to do next. Let's go. _(Everybody departs from the stage.)_

# Scene 3 _(They now enter Yamraj's darbar. They are continuously screaming and shouting. There is a gate keeper standing there.)_ __Gatekeeper:__ Hoi! _(Sees Yamdoot)_ Ah! Yamdoot ji, why have you picked up so many children? _(Looks at something that looks like a register)_ You were supposed to bring only one child but you seem to have brought a whole cricket team. Your math was always a little weak. _(Gatekeeper smiles to himself)_ __Yamdoot:__ Oh god, here I am almost dead, and he is teasing me?! Do you think I am stupid? _(to the gatekeeper)_ Can't you see? Look at me! Look at my clothes, my cheeks – they are red and I am in pain. Bully! _(By now the children are getting, very impatient. They are dying to meet Yamraj. Rohan is holding on to Vikram's hand in a firm grip)_ __Yamdoot:__ These kids just did not want to listen to anything I said. They insisted that if I took Vikram they would come along too. And when I said no, they slapped me. Look at my cheeks. __Rohan:__ Naturally! All Vikram has is malaria and he is going to get well soon. Who is Yamraj to pick on Vikram for no reason? __Gatekeeper:__ _(Now he too looks worried)_ Sh! Sh! Don't talk so loudly. What if Yamraj hears you? No one has dared to speak about him in such a manner! __Rakesh:__ Are you letting us in or shall we....? _(they are about to pounce on the gatekeeper when Yamraj's voice can be heard from inside.)_ __Yamraj:__ What a lot of noise! Who is that? How dare someone disturb me! Everyone in my kingdom knows I watch cartoon network at this time. No one disturbs me at this hour! __Yamraj:__ Aaaah, so much noise! I hate noise. Send them in. ‘Down, down, Yamraj!' in my kingdom? That too in my own house? How dare they! _(Children enter Yamraj's den pushing the gatekeeper)_ __Gatekeeper:__ _(to the children)_ Now look what you have done! Yamraj is angry. _(A little scared)_ Sorry Maharaj, but there are some children here. They say they are from India. __Yamraj:__ Some children have come from India! Where is Yamdoot? I had asked only for one boy, Vikram, to be brought. Has Yamdoot brought him or not? __Yamdoot:__ Yes Maharaj, I have brought him. But his friends insisted on coming along too. They just would not listen to me, Maharaj. They forced me to bring them too and beat me up when I refused. Look at my cheeks, they are so red. _(The kids are impatient. hey are shouting ‘Down, down, Yamraj! ‘Yamraj Hai Hai')_

# Scene 4 __Sheela:__ Eee... Yamraj! The real Yamraj! Wait till I tell everyone when we get back home! __Rohan:__ _(On seeing Yamraj)_ Wow, I can't believe this. You actually exist! __Rakesh:__ _(Puts his hand on Yamraj's shoulder. Yamraj is stunned. Nobody has had the guts to do this before.)_ Hi Yamraj, how are you? __Yamraj:__ _(Shoving his hand aside)_ Hey, hope you know who you're talking to! I am Yamraj. Yamraj. _(Stands straight)_ The whole world is afraid of me, do you understand? __Sheela:__ So what? I am Sheela, Sheela from Mumbai, India. _(The kids are discussing something with one another)_ __Yamraj:__ _(yelling)_ Stop it at once! I hate noise. Just tell me who among you is Vikram. Let him come forward. He should have been dead long ago. We cannot delay his death any further. We all have our targets. I want only Vikram! _(Everyone holds on to Vikram)_ __Rita:__ What do you mean you want Vikram? I want a Mercedes Benz. But does that mean I will get one? __Rohan:__ You don't always get what you want. __Yash:__ Well, this time you are not getting what you want. And if you want Vikram you must want us all. __Sheela:__ Buy one, get five free! You will more than meet your target. How's that? __Rita:__ Yamraj, Vikram has malaria. It's not a life threatening disease. Don't you know that? And you have the cheek to call yourself Yamraj _(laughs – Yamdoot hears the word Cheek and realizes that he is in pain.)_ __Chorus:__ Down, down, Yamraj! __Yamraj:__ Quiet! I can't stand noise. This is too much. _(to Yamdoot)_ Where have you picked up these many kids from? I had asked you to bring only one but this is an entire cricket team!

__Yamdoot:__ Yamraj, I had gone to Vikram's house and just as I was about to take him away these kids came and insisted on coming with me. When I said I wanted only Vikram, they pounced on me and beat me up. Look at my cheeks, they are so red. They said that I could not take Vikram alone _(Yamraj is trying to pull Vikram towards him. The kids are pulling him towards them.)_ __Yamraj:__ These kids are from India you say? __Yamdoot:__ Yes Maharaj, these days you hear a lot about how they fight injustice. They stand united and are ready to die for a just cause. __Yamraj:__ But I have not seen any children standing up for a just cause. These kids seem special. __Yash:__ Of course we are special! Find a better excuse to pick up someone, Yamraj. __Rita:__ No way... We will not let go of Vikram and if you want him, you will have to keep us too. _(They are all talking at the same time. Yamdoot and gate keeper are stunned. Yamraj hates noise they know.)_ __Yamraj:__ Stop it, how many times do I have to tell you that I hate noise. Wait, _(takes out his diary)_ I have never seen kids like you before. Never seen children so loyal to one another. Hats off to all you kids from India. _(Starts to cry. The kids are amused to see him cry)_ __Rita:__ Yamraj is crying. I can't believe this. __Yamraj:__ _(Still sobbing.)_ Go, go before I change my mind. Take your friend and go, he will get better, he is in good hands. He is lucky to have friends like you. Go away! _(Kids are ecstatic – Long live Yamraj! they shout loudly!)_

__Yamraj:__ _(Putting his hands on his ears)_ Noise, so much noise, I hate noise. Now I get it. India is a noisy country, so naturally these kids are also a noisy lot. Hurry up and leave or else... __Vikram:__ _(Goes and hugs Yamraj)_ Thank you Yamraj! Thank you very much. You are not so bad after all _(Yamraj is too shocked even to react)_ __Rakesh:__ Come, lets go. Now he knows he can't mess with us! __Vikram:__ Forget it, friends! Remember, all's well that ends well. _(They depart as noisily as when they had arrived. Yamraj is too stunned to react. Yamdoot is relieved. He is drinking water and is about to leave when Yamraj catches him.)_ __Yamraj:__ Where are you going? Can't you do anything correctly? You messed up, so now you have to work overtime and go back to India and... __Yamdoot:__ Oh no! Not there again! _(Tries to run and gets caught. He is beaten.)_ __Yamraj:__ You will go to India and you will not be paid for extra work done. Understood? __Yamdoot:__ Yes, Maharaj. I will do as you say. Just don't hit me anymore. Look at my cheeks. _(Looks in a mirror)_ Red as an apple!


# Jungle Brew

In a little hilly hamlet of southern India, lived a young girl called Bulbuli. She lived in a hut with her mother. Her house was surrounded by the tallest and greenest trees you would have ever seen. On misty days, the leaves of plants and trees held the biggest dewdrops you could imagine. Bulbuli was as sprightly as her name. She, along with her friends, would prance through the endless forests around her village. She loved to take in deep breaths every morning as the air carried all kinds of different aromas. Sometimes she could smell a sweet, sweet fragrance. At other times it was a strong and sharp scent. Then there were days when all she could smell was a familiar bouquet.

Waking up to those refreshing scents was the best way for Bulbuli to begin her day. Then there was Totaram the parrot, who would fly in to the village every morning, perch himself atop a tree facing Bulbuli's hut, and tell her of the entire buzz in the forest. He would also tell her of his flights to different lands and of people who lived there. Bulbuli loved to hear Totaram's tales. She longed to visit these lands and see their different sights. Her heart would race and thump loudly as Totaram would speak but it would always end with a deep sigh. She had to stop dreaming of faraway lands when she had never even been to Senseless Point.

Everybody in the village talked of Senseless Point. A few people from the neighbouring villages had been there but no one from her own village. From all the talk around, it seemed like a mysterious place promising an experience of a lifetime. Bulbuli believed that if she ever had the chance to go to Senseless Point, she would return to her hamlet and describe it to everyone. She would tell everyone about this mysterious place.

On this particular morning, Bulbuli waited for Totaram's whistle. She fed the hens and collected their eggs. Next she fed the cows and then milked them. All the while she paused from time to time to listen to Totaram's call. Tired of waiting, she left for her school. All the students in her school sat under a huge banyan tree.

Bulbuli could hardly pay attention to what was being taught. Her eyes searched for Totaram, who had never missed visiting her ever since the time they became friends. Several days passed and Bulbuli grew more concerned about Totaram. She worried that Totaram might be hurt. She had no way of knowing if he was safe. Bulbuli grew more despondent with each day. After school, she would walk through the forests calling out to Totaram. “Hello! Are you here somewhere Totaram?” she would yell cupping her mouth with her hands. But there was no response.

Then one very early morning, even before the sun had risen, she heard a very noisy and distressed bird call. She leapt out of bed and rushed out to look. It was Totaram. “Bulbuli! Wake up! I need to talk to you!” Bulbuli stretched out her arm so that Totaram could perch on it. “Where have you been, Totaram? I have been so worried about you. What is the matter? You seem very upset!” “There is trouble at Senseless Point. War has broken out in the forest.” “Calm down Totaram or you will wake the entire village. What kind of trouble are you talking about? And who is at war?” asked a puzzled Bulbuli. “The jungle... Oops! Sorry, Bulbuli. I do need to stop screaming. The jungles are at war. Senseless Point is not what it used to be. All the animals are frightened. They do not know what is going to happen next. Bulbuli, we have to think of something,” cried Totaram anxiously. “I still do not understand. How can jungles be at war? Why don't you take me to Senseless Point?” said Bulbuli.

Totaram grew even more agitated. “Senseless Point is two sunrises and two dusks away. Your small feet will not be able to carry you there.” “My mind is bigger than my feet, Totaram. Don't let the size of my feet fool you. I'm not afraid to do difficult things. Besides, the least I can do is try.” “The journey is long and hard, Bulbuli. I'm not sure...” mused Totaram. “Well, I cannot think of any other way to help. You must take me to Senseless Point,” pleaded Bulbuli. Totaram thought for a long time. Reluctantly, he agreed. “All right then, but we must leave immediately,” he said.

Just then Bulbuli realised that she could not leave without telling her mother. Totaram suggested that they stop on the way to get Koyal, his friend to tell her mother first thing in the morning. “Hurry now. We must not lose any time,” Totaram urged. So off they went. Totaram flew just above Bulbuli's head and led the way. Bulbuli walked and walked for several hours. She was not unused to walking through thickets and tall grass. But then she grew hungry and tired. Totaram could see that she needed to eat and drink. “Just a little longer Bulbuli. There are coconut trees up ahead,” said Totaram. When they reached the coconut plantations, Totaram let out a shrill whistle. “Whoeeeee...” From nowhere swung a frisky monkey. He was so full of beans that Totaram had to chide him. “Calm down, Bandaroo! I have work for you. Stop prancing around.”

“Alright Totaram. What is it?” asked Bandaroo. “Pluck a couple of coconuts and toss them below. My friend Bulbuli here is hungry,” informed Totaram. Bandaroo obliged. He threw three green coconuts down. They split open as they crashed to the ground. Bulbuli hungrily reached out for them and scooped out the creamy kernel. She ate quickly when all the while Bandaroo squealed with delight from the tree above. “Thanks Bandaroo. That was filling,” said Bulbuli. “Call me anytime folks. I'm the best thrower in the jungle,” said Bandaroo chirpily.

Totaram and Bulbuli carried on with their journey. After several hours, Bulbuli grew weary and exhausted. However, she was not going to give up. She had an opportunity of a lifetime here. A visit to Senseless Point for people around her village was like a pilgrimage. Each time that she felt fatigued, Bulbuli tried to picture Senseless Point in her mind. She imagined a beautiful place that could fill people's hearts with happiness. That scene in her mind was enough to make her forget how footsore she was. The first dusk of their journey set in. ‘Another day to go,' thought Bulbuli. Bulbuli rested under a tree while Totaram found a comfortable spot on a branch above. Soon it was dawn. Bulbuli was awakened by the chattering of what seemed like a million birds in the jungle. Bulbuli took several big breaths and stretched her arms out to wake up her body. The morning felt different. She could smell all the familiar scents that she used to every morning, but somehow, they were stronger and more refreshing.

“Totaram! Can you smell the freshness in the air? I love it!” she told the parrot. “You have all day to take your whiffs. Let us get moving,” ordered Totaram. Totaram and she talked little the next day. He could see that Bulbuli was tired, hungry and thirsty. Totaram flew down to perch on her shoulder. “There is a stream nearby. We will rest there for a while.” In a little while, Bulbuli heard the sound of rushing water. In no time they arrived at the stream. The clear water glistened in the sunlight. The water seemed to be racing with itself to get somewhere. It was a beautiful sight. Bulbuli leaned over and cupped the water in her hands and drank all that she could. She splashed water on her face and refreshed herself. Just as she was done, Totaram landed on her shoulder once again and nudged her to stretch out her palms. He then dropped red, delicious berries in them.

“Oh Totaram! You are the nicest friend I know. Thank you so much,” smiled Bulbuli. “Go ahead and eat them. Berries are my favourite food. I have already eaten too many today!” gushed Totaram. They rested for a while and then set out once again. Bulbuli walked and walked while Totaram flew just above her talking to her all the while. After several hours, Bulbuli sat down. “I need to rest Totaram. I am really very exhausted. Totaram let out a loud whistle. Within minutes, an elephant strolled up to them. Totaram introduced Hathi to Bulbuli and told him of their journey to Senseless Point. “I believe only a human can help the war in the jungle. Animals are running away from what is paradise for us,” said a concerned Hathi. “Will you give Bulbuli a ride, Hathi?” asked Totaram. “Her will is strong but her strength is failing.”

“Of course. Climb up, little girl, but I can only take you up to the trail. After that you are on your own. I cannot be away from my group for long,” said Hathi. Bulbuli was relieved. Her small legs needed rest and she was able to get a spectacular view of the jungle from atop Hathi's back. Hathi, like Totaram, had many tales to tell. The day passed easily. At dusk, the trio settled by a cave. Totaram and Hathi gathered dried leaves and straw and made a bed for Bulbuli. As soon as Bulbuli lay down, she dozed off. At the third sunrise, Totaram did not have to wake Bulbuli. She was up at the crack of dawn. Totaram brought her some purple berries this time, which she ate with delight. The young girl, the parrot and the elephant began the last leg of their journey. Bulbuli was becoming more uncertain of what to expect. First there was the anticipation of Senseless Point. Then there was the uneasiness of the jungles at war. As she was getting closer to her destination, her heart began to fill with thrill and excitement but with a tinge of apprehension.

Shortly, Hathi stopped. He said, “It is time for me to say goodbye. I must return to my family. All the animals will be grateful to you if you could help end the war of the jungles. We cannot bear to live anywhere else. These jungles have been our home for generations.” Bulbuli thanked Hathi for carrying her as far as he did. “I hope the jungles hear me out, Hathi. I promise to do my best.” Totaram sat on Bulbuli's shoulder and asked her to slow down. “Look at that trail going downward. That will lead us to Senseless Point,” instructed Totaram. At this point, a strange humming sound enveloped the jungle. As they walked further, the noise grew louder and louder. “Where is that noise coming from?” asked Bulbuli covering her ears. “That is the sound of three jungles at war, and it is only going to get louder as we approach Senseless Point,” hollered Totaram.

Bulbuli could barely believe what was going on. Never before had she encountered such a scene. As she climbed down the trail and looked around, she saw nothing out of the ordinary. But the clamour was ear splitting. Totaram pecked at her ear to get her attention. With the shrieks of the jungles, Bulbuli could hardly hear Totaram. With three more steps, Bulbuli found herself amidst a clearing. It was as if all the trees of the jungle had suddenly disappeared. There were hillocks stretching as far as her eyes could see. “This is Senseless Point. This is a place where everything grows wild. Humans hardly ever come here,” said Totaram. Then Totaram began screaming, “A human being is here, a human being!” But in the deafening din of the jungles, his voice went unheard. Bulbuli could not get herself to remove her hands from her ears. She could not understand what the jungles were saying, but by now it was clear that there were three jungles involved.

In the distance, just in front of her, she could see green beds. On her right, were hundreds and hundreds of shrubs with magenta flowers. On her left, she could see very tall plants. The sight before her was breathtaking. And the aroma was stunning. Bulbuli's face lit up with wonder. She turned towards each jungle several times over, to take in the splendour. Almost instantly, the noise of the jungles began to die down, as if the jungles had spotted her. That was when Bulbuli took her first deep breath. She could smell the aroma of tea. Then in the next breath, she was drawn to the fragrance on her right. It was a spicy fragrance- something she was familiar with. Unsure, she breathed in some more and said to herself, “Ah! Elaichi!”

A gentle breeze pushed her to her left. Her head turned and she smiled when she took in her next deep breath. It was an attractive and pure smell. Instantly, she recognised the plant. Bulbuli joined her hands and bowed with reverence. “You are Tulsi!” Bulbuli was overwhelmed by the fragrances. They smelled like three octaves of the same musical note – Sa, Sa, Sa. Bulbuli felt joyful. She stretched her arms and twirled around with her eyes closed.

The fragrances and the musical notes played in her head, over and over again. All her senses were alive. This was a magical moment for her. Never before had she felt so delighted. Just then, the elaichi plant spoke, “Maybe this little girl could punish the tea bushes.” “Maybe. Little girl, can you stop the tea bushes from stealing our fragrance?” asked a Tulsi plant. Bulbuli was stunned to hear the jungles speak to her. Before she could respond, a tea bush spoke up. “Maybe if these two were not around, humans might be able to ap-preciate our aroma.”

“Is that what this war is all about, worrying about your smells getting stolen?” asked a puzzled Bulbuli. She smiled to herself. “Do you have any idea what you all smell like from where I stand? I can smell each of you distinctly.” “It really is not our fault. We are not fragrance thieves. Our leaves take on the smell of anything that grows around us. In fact, with tulsi and elaichi around us, we have to work extra hard to keep our identity. It is not as if the tulsi jungle and the elaichi jungle have lost their perfume to me. You just said that you can smell their individual whiff,” said a tea bush. Bulbuli took several deep breaths to calm down. She discovered that every time she took in a collected breath of tea, elaichi and tulsi, it helped her relax. There was something very soothing about the three of them together.

“My mother has taught me important things from the Vedas. Do you know what they have to say?” asked Bulbuli. “The sun should be a giver of happiness, the sky should be a giver of happiness, and all trees and plants should be givers of happiness. All these should give us peace of mind. Do you think you are doing that?” The jungles fell silent. They were listening to Bulbuli. Bulbuli had an idea. She whispered something to Totaram. He flew off from her shoulder almost immediately. A tulsi plant spoke. “The elaichi and tulsi grow wild. We have no control over where and how we grow. And neither do we tell the wind which way to blow.” Bulbuli thought for a moment. “In that case, how can you blame the tea? Maybe you ought to blame the wind.”

“The wind! Tulsi and Elaichi fight constantly with the wind too. They do not want the wind to take their perfume out of here,” said a tea bush. Bulbuli was aghast. “Is that true?” she asked. Neither of the two guilty jungles replied. Bulbuli sighed deeply. Just then Totaram returned. He carried a few tulsi leaves, some elaichi seeds and tea leaves in his beak and placed them on Bulbuli's palm. Bulbuli gently rubbed them together. She raised her palm to smell them. She let out a loud delighted shriek. The jungles screamed back in unison, “What is the matter, little girl? Are you all right?”

Bulbuli laughed with joy. “You can now wave the white flag for peace. I have a bit of all three of you in my hand and together you smell like nothing else in the world. One whiff of all of you together is so relaxing.” Totatram whispered in Bulbuli's ear. She smiled. “Totaram tells me that the animals in the jungles have known just which leaf to eat when they are unwell. Even the birds have eaten your fruit and leaves together to know how quickly you can make them better again. Did you jungles even know that?” asked Bulbuli. “These animals eat your leaves to relieve all kinds of sickness. They even come here to Senseless Point to rejuvenate themselves. Totaram, get me a bunch of tea, elaichi and tulsi. I am going back home to brew a warm cup of tea with tulsi and elaichi for my mother. Celebrate, jungles! The world is going to know how well you taste together. Which means that you have to get on well with each other. Can you do that?” asked Bulbuli.

Bulbuli and Totaram giggled. So did the jungles. This time the noise level rose not because of the fighting, but with laughter. Bulbuli was relieved to see the war coming to an end. She realised that the jungles had each been able to feel pride in their uniqueness. Bulbuli asked Totaram to collect bunches of tea, tulsi leaves along with elaichi seeds. “Jungles, I am now going to return to my village with the most exquisite and refreshing tea, one with tulsi and elaichi. And I promise to return with people from my village to introduce them to Senseless Point. The most refreshing place on earth!” That is how tulsi and elaichi flavoured tea was discovered. Have you tried it yet?


# A Walk Among Trees

The royal orchard looked lush after the rains. The earth was soft and wet and had a delightful fragrance. The trees looked like they had been washed and each leaf looked like it had been polished by hand. The head gardener was getting a new tree planted. He directed his helpers to a pit that had been prepared just that morning. The young tree was carefully lowered. All along, the head gardener kept saying, “I will lose my job and all of you will rot in the darkest chambers of the palace if this tree does not survive. And if it blooms, you won't have to work another day in your life. You will all be handsomely rewarded.” As an offering to Mother Earth, he threw in sugar cane juice, before the roots of the young tree were patted with mud. Just then the King and his young prince stepped into the orchard. This was to be the first walk among the trees for the prince with his father. “Father, what is this sapling?” asked the prince, pointing to a plant. “It is a pomegranate sapling. The tree that will have the most beautiful flowers...” The prince watched his father admiring the trees around them with love and care.

Pomegranate It is hard to say which is more beautiful - a pomegranate fruit or the brilliant red flower. The fruit has a deep red colour and is the size of a cricket ball. It has leathery skin and when it is opened, you find many red, juicy seeds, which look as though they are made of glass. Each seed has a woody, crunchy centre. Some fruits are yellowish pink and have pink seeds. These are also very tasty. The pomegranate tree grows to about three metres. The long and narrow leaves are shiny and the branches have a few thorns. In the spring, the tree is covered with scarlet flowers. The petals look as though they are made of crinkly paper. These flowers have no smell. The petals grow out of a red part called the calyx. After the petals fall, the calyx begins to grow bigger and bigger till it becomes a pomegranate with a crown.

Pomegranate juice is very tasty and is taken to bring down fever. Pomegranates contain plenty of natural sugars and vitamin C. The dried seeds are made into sour anardana, which is a spice used to flavour pakoras and aloo paranthas. The rind of the pomegranate is dried and powdered and taken to cure an upset stomach. Pomegranates are called anar in Hindi. One of the most renowned dancers in the court of Mughal emperor Akbar was called Anarkali — bud of the anar — because she was so beautiful. Some pomegranates are called kandhari, as once they were only grown in a place called Kandahar, in Afghanistan.

Jackfruit The jackfruit grows on a tall tree with a thick foliage of dark green leaves. The jackfruit does not grow just on the branches like other fruit, but also on the tree trunk. Another amazing fact is that when the jackfruit tree turns very old, the fruit can also grow on those roots which come out above the ground. The large, oblong fruits can sometimes weigh as much as 40 kilograms. Their rough skins are covered with conical studs. When jackfruits are young they are green and eaten as a vegetable, but when they are ripe and turn yellowish-brown they are eaten as a fruit. The ripe fruit has a strong characteristic smell and not everyone likes it.

The seeds of the jackfruit are also very tasty. They can be roasted and eaten. Fried jackfruit makes delicious chips. When sugared and dried, the fruits make excellent candy. The leaves are warmed and used to foment wounds and stop swellings. The wood of this tree is not attacked by termites. An orange dye is made by boiling the wood. This is used to colour the robes of Buddhist monks. When two sticks of the jackfruit tree are rubbed together, fire can be produced. The tree is very ancient and it is mentioned in Sanskrit texts as the panas. It is the largest tree-borne fruit in the world. This tree has its origin in India. The fruit is very nutritious, as it has carbohydrates, proteins, some fats and vitamins.

Papaya When we cut open a golden orange papaya, we find a lot of shiny, black seeds that look like whole black pepper. Can you imagine how many trees can grow from each fruit — at least 500! But not all the trees that grow from the seeds will give us fruit. This is because some trees have flowers that are male and other trees have flowers that are female. When we plant many papaya trees together, it ensures that cross-pollination takes place and the ‘female' trees bear fruit. The fragrance of papaya flowers is very sweet. Insects and birds help in pollination and little papaya fruits begin to form.

The tree has big leaves that are thickly veined. When they dry, they fall off leaving a scar on the trunk. The wood of the trunk is not hard. It is soft inside, rather like the stem of a big plant. Papayas are very nutritious, with lots of vitamin C and A, and calcium too. Raw papayas are used as a tasty vegetable. Papayas have an enzyme called papain, which is useful for digestion. Raw papaya helps in tenderizing meat. Ripe papaya pulp is good for skin problems and is used to get rid of spots and blemishes on the skin. Papayas came from Mexico and Central America. But they are seen almost everywhere in India!

Banana Some banana trees are as tall as a single-storeyed house while others are only as tall as a person. The leaves are sometimes one-and-a-half metres long and over half a metre broad, with a thick rib running through the centre. The new leaves have a fresh green colour but as they grow older, they become darker and get torn at the edges. The trunk of the banana has no bark. It is actually a thick stem made of the stems of the leaves that are tightly wound around each other. The flowers of the banana tree grow inside a reddish cone. Hundreds of tiny white flowers can be found inside each cone. As many as a hundred bananas can grow together in a bunch. When the bananas are almost ripe, the bunch is cut down and left to ripen.

Raw bananas are eaten as a vegetable. Delicious chips can be made from raw bananas. Banana flowers are used to make tasty curries. Monkeys and elephants love bananas. An elephant can eat many bunches by himself! Bananas are nutritious as they have many vitamins such as A, B and C, as well as calcium, which is needed for our bones to grow strong. It is also a good source of minerals like potassium and magnesium. Bananas are considered auspicious by Hindus and are offered during a puja. When there is a wedding or a puja, the trees or bunches of bananas are used to decorate both sides of the entrance to the house. The leaves make wonderful, natural plates. The leaves are also used to make cups.

Jamun The jamun tree is tall and graceful, with a grey-brown bark and deep green, long oval pointed leaves. The trees always have dense foliage. They grow about 12 metres tall. Children love to play beneath their deep shade. The bark is smooth but the wood is weak so the trees are not very safe to climb. From March to May, the tree is full of bunches of tiny creamy flowers, which bees and other insects love for their nectar. We all wait for the rains, when the jamun gives delicious, deep purple fruit with a stone in the centre. The ripe fruit is sweet-sour and good to eat. Ask any parrot or squirrel, or even fruit bats that come to eat the juicy berries at night! Jamun trees often grow wild in forests and according to Hindu legend, Krishna loved to eat the fruit when he grazed his cows. The dark purple colour of the fruit is supposed to be the same colour as Krishna's complexion. Lord Ganesh is supposed to love this fruit too. The tree is also sacred to Shiva and Vishnu.

This tree is originally from India. The name jamun, comes from the word Jambu Dweep, as India was once known in the olden days, since it was supposed to be full of jamun trees! Ripe jamuns are very tasty when they are eaten with rock salt. In the forests when wild jamuns fall from the tree they are eaten by bears, deer, monkeys and other small animals. The bark and seeds of the jamun are dried and powdered and then used as a medicine for diabetes. The fruit is rich in fruit sugar, iron and vitamin C.

Guava Guavas are really delicious! Ripe yellow ones are tasty, but the crunchy green ones are mouth-watering too, especially when sprinkled with salt and masala. Have you seen a guava tree? It is not very tall, possibly as tall as a single storeyed house. The trunk is slender with a grey-ochre bark that peels off in strips. The leaves are oval and rough to touch. The tree is full of beautiful, five-petalled white flowers, towards the end of winter and then again at the time of the rains. When these flowers fall, small green guavas begin to appear. At first, the fruit is green and hard. As it ripens, it becomes softer and the colour becomes a creamy gold. The flesh is white and in the centre, there are lots of woody seeds. Some guavas have pink flesh. These are also very tasty. Another type of guava is deep red on the outside.

Guavas that ripen in the winter are always tastier than those found during the rest of the year. In India, Allahabadi guavas are famous for their taste. There are so many guava trees in India that it is hard to believe that they came from Brazil in South America. Sailors travelling from those parts, brought the seeds of guavas with them. Parrots and monkeys love guavas. It is believed that a guava pecked by a parrot will be sweet! Guavas are very good for us as they are full of vitamin A and C. The tree has other uses too. The leaves are mashed and used to relieve toothache. The bark is used to make a dye for colouring silk.

Coconut Graceful coconut trees grow in sandy soil, in the tropics where the weather is warm and wet. Coastal areas have the largest number of coconut trees. This tall tree has a slim trunk, which bends with the strong breeze that blows in coastal areas. Because it bends, it does not break. The water inside green coconuts is very tasty and nutritious. It has sugar, protein, amino acids, and minerals like calcium, iron and copper, and vitamins. As the fruit becomes ripe, it turns brown and hard and the water inside becomes sweeter, until it is quite dry. Coconut oil is extracted from the flesh when the nut turns brown and woody. Each coconut leaf has a long central rib with smaller hard leaves growing on either side. Waving in the breeze, coconut leaves resemble the feathers of some giant bird. The leaves are plaited to make baskets and mats, and also to make thatched roofs. The hollowed out trunk is used as boats.

It is amazing that even the husk, that encloses the shell of the coconut, is used for making ropes, mats, brushes and to stuff mattresses. All over the world, the coconut tree is prized for its different uses. Sometimes it is known as the tree of heaven. It is supposed to have come from the Melanesian islands in the Pacific Ocean. If you had no other tree but the coconut, you could build a house, have a meal and a cool drink, make clothes from leaves, make a broom and even have a soft mattress to sleep on! Can you think of any other uses? The coconut is a symbol of prosperity.

“Father, why are these trees so special to you?” asked the prince. “Son, these trees grow in different parts of India and during my travels to different states, I have chosen the most delicious fruit trees of those regions. They all need different kinds of climate to survive. But, here, our soil is so rich and our gardeners so dedicated, that they have been able to raise all these trees. Look at this one. It is a ber tree.”

Ber Sometimes on the way to school or walking around the edges of fields, we come across ber bushes. They are thorny, but the little red fruit with a stone in the centre is worth plucking because it is very tasty. There are many different types of bers, some grow on trees with graceful, drooping branches whereas others grow on bushes. Some are round and others have a longish shape, but they all have a wonderful flavour. Ber trees can be about six metres tall and the bushes are only about one metre high. The ber tree and the ber bush are both thorny. The trees have longer thorns and that is why when bers are ripe, people take a long stick with a sharp knife at the end of it, to cut down ripe bers. Sometimes, if the branch is shaken hard, the ripe fruit drops down and can be collected. Ber trees grow in dry places where it does not rain too much. The leaves are eaten by goats, camels and cattle. Silkworms also eat the leaves of the ber. Another very interesting insect called the lac insect lives on the branches of the ber. The insect sucks the juice and secretes a red substance called lac, from which paints, varnishes and dyes are made.

Orange We all wait for juicy oranges in the beginning of winter. The tangy smell of a peeled orange is unmistakable. It comes from the oil in the rind. The orange is easy to eat because it can be peeled and each section eaten separately. It is also a great thirst quencher on a hot day. Oranges are full of vitamin C, which keeps colds and coughs away. They also have calcium which is good for strong bones. Orange juice is a popular drink and the flavour of oranges is used in many food products. The best oranges in India come from Nagpur. The trees are about six metres tall, and somewhat thorny.

The leaves are dark green and glossy. If you crush a leaf between your fingers, it has a strong tangy smell. If you sit near flowering orange trees, the perfume is very soothing. That is why the flowers are dried and then stuffed into pillows for a good beauty sleep. The rind of the orange is dried and mixed with gram flour to make a scrub for the skin. This can be used instead of soap. In the olden days, ladies in China carried oranges in their hands to keep them smelling sweet. It is thought that the orange tree came from the southern parts of China. Some people think that its origin lies in the foothills of the Himalayas.

Chikoo When round, brown chikoos grow on trees, they remind us of soft, brown balls. The skin is a bit fuzzy, and the brownish flesh within is very sweet and has a grainy texture. The chikoo has shiny, long, black seeds inside. The leaves of the tree are longish and glossy. The tree can reach a height of about 10 metres. This tree was brought from South America many years ago where the Aztec Indians called the tree Chicle. They tapped the bark for the rubbery gum that oozes out of it and made an ancient chewing gum from it. This is how the idea of making chewing gum came to people's minds in modern times. The word chikoo comes from chicle. Chikoos grow best in warm and humid places. The best chikoos come from Maharashtra and central India. In some parts of the world, the chikoo is known as the Sapodilla. This fruit has a very high sugar content. It also has a good amount of vitamin C. In some places, the seeds are made into a paste to cure insect bites and stings. Chikoo ice cream is delicious. Have you tried it?

Tamarind The tamarind tree grows to a height of over 20 metres. It has a long straight trunk with dark brown bark. The branches are strong and supple and droop downwards. The tiny leaves are of a fresh green colour and form graceful, feathery foliage. They are also sour like the tamarind and are nice to eat. The tamarind has beautiful yellow flowers with thin streaks of red. When the flower dries up, its place is taken by a tamarind pod. The pod is green and gradually turns a light brown as it ripens. It is like suede to touch. When it ripens in winter, it becomes a deep brown and the pulp inside is sour with a hint of sweetness. Tamarind seeds are dark brown and enclosed inside the pulp. Squirrels and birds love to eat ripe tamarind. Children also love raw tamarind dipped in rock salt, though it can give them a sore throat sometimes. Tamarind is used to make delicious curries, pickles, chutneys and tangy jal jeera, which is not only cooling in Summer, but also delicious with gol gappas.

Tamarind is very rich in iron and vitamin C. The seeds are dried and powdered and can be used as a flour. Tender tamarind leaves and tamarind flowers are also used in cooking. The tree gives very dense shade in summer. There are many superstitions in India about the tamarind tree. People believe that ghosts live on its branches and that one must not sleep under it at night. If you look closely at the leaves of a tamarind tree at night, you will notice that they fold up. Of course, the truth is that, because the big tree breathes out carbon dioxide, it is not healthy to sleep under it at night. It is thought that many, many years ago, the tree was brought from Africa. It began to grow very well in this country and now it is very hard to believe that it came from another country.

“Father, what will this new tree grow up to be?” asked the prince excitedly. The King looked at the young tree and then at his son. “Just as you will be king some day, this young tree will grow to bear the king of fruits — the mango! Wait for some time and you will get to taste a fruit like none other.”

Mango Who doesn't love delicious mangoes! They are equally tasty, whether they are ripe and golden or green and sour when they are raw and eaten with a bit of salt. We all wait eagerly for the summer season when the mango fruit ripens. It has been rightly called the king of fruits in India. There are many types of mangoes. Some are big and yellow and can weigh almost a kilogram; others are tiny, green and juicy and have to be sucked to be really enjoyed. You can throw a whole lot of mangoes in a bucket of ice water and when they are cool, sit under a tree and enjoy them. It is a good practice to wear old clothes and eat mangoes because their juice can ruin clothes. In India, we have more than a thousand different varieties of mangoes. Wild mango trees originally grew in the Himalayan foothills and spread from there to the rest of the world. The mango tree is about 15 metres tall. Old trees can sometimes grow up to 30 metres. Some mango trees in orchards are just about three metres tall.

The trunk is a dark brown and the long leaves are pointed at the tips. The crushed leaves have a sharp scent. The mango flowers at the end of the cold weather. The bunches of the little pale yellow flowers have a sweet smell. Honey bees gather nectar from them. Mango leaves are strung on a thread and hung over a doorway, when there is a wedding or any other ceremonial celebration in Hindu households. The motif of a mango can also be found in Indian textiles, saris and various Indian handicrafts. Mango leaves, seeds and flowers are all used for medicine. Mango has lots of vitamin C, which helps us to fight off colds, coughs and gives us healthy gums. Vitamins A and B are also found in this fruit. After admiring the trees for a while the King and his son headed back to the palace. The prince turned back. He smiled and thought to himself, 'Yes, I like our orchard and all its trees, just like father. I will soon grow to be a king and you will too,' and waved to the young swaying mango tree.

Green Gyan Trees are the tallest of all plants in the world and they were present on the earth much before human beings appeared. Trees grow on mountains, along seashores and in hot deserts. We find them growing along the edges of roads, in fields and in our homes and gardens. All plants and trees are necessary for life on earth as they provide oxygen that living beings need to survive. Most plants have a green colouring matter in their leaves called chlorophyll. During the day, when sunlight falls on the leaves, the leaves prepare food for the plants by a process called photosynthesis. They do this with the help of the water absorbed by the roots, the carbon dioxide from the air that enters the leaves through tiny pores on the surface of the leaf, and sunlight. Oxygen is let out into the air as a result of photosynthesis.

There are thousands of different types of trees but the ones that give us delicious fruit are the best of them all. All trees bear fruit. However, all fruits are not edible. Some may even be poisonous! But trees are our special friends. They give us shade on a hot day; they provide us with food, timber and medicines. When trees grow over a large area, they form forests. Forests affect the climate of a place, prevent soil erosion and provide a habitat for a variety of animals. We must look after trees and plant trees if we can, so that we have a healthy environment.
