# Let's Go Seed Collecting!

Tooka and Poi love collecting things. Smooth pebbles from the riverside, twirly and tickly fern leaves, bright red buttons that have fallen from a school uniform — Tooka and Poi pick them all up. Every day, they meet after school, near the bendy coconut tree by the river, and wait for their best friend. At five o' clock on the dot, Inji arrives, huffing and puffing like an old school bus. Inji is a friendly dog with eyes the colour of chocolate and a tail that never stops wagging.

Together, Tooka, Poi, and Inji walk, heads bent, scanning the gleaming road, the tufts of grass, and moss-covered rocks for interesting things to collect. Their favourite thing to collect are seeds! Tooka and Poi collect shiny red seeds that look like ladybirds, spiky burrs that stick to their clothes, and the giant bean-shaped pods of the copper pod tree.

The pods make a delightful tshh-tsh-tshh sound when Tooka and Poi shake it about. Poi loves to make up funny songs to go with the seed music.

“Inji is the best of dogs, She likes big flowers and little frogs, And birds and seeds and ants and snails, But best of all, she loves her tail!” Over and over she sings these songs, making Tooka laugh and Inji bark happily.

Tooka, Poi, and Inji are sitting by the tamarind tree. Tooka's favourite seeds are the pudgy pods from around this tree. He loves to suck on its sour flesh until he gets to the shiny brown seeds inside. It makes Tooka's face scrunch up in funny ways and the hair on the back of his neck stands up.

Suddenly they hear a small squeaky voice say “Hellllooooo." Tooka and Poi look at each other, puzzled. They can't see anybody. “Up here! Up here!” they hear the voice say again. Tooka and Poi look up and down, and all around, but there isn't a person in sight.

“It's me, Pacha. I'm the tamarind tree.” Inji barks loudly and wags her tail faster than normal. Phat-phat-phat it goes, back and forth. “Why hello Inji,” Pacha the Tree says. “I haven't seen you in days!” Tooka and Poi become still as statues. Their eyes widen and their mouths freeze in big 'O' shapes. Finally, Poi smiles shyly and says, “Hello Pacha the Tamarind Tree. It's nice to meet you. I'm Poi!” Then she gives the tree a big hug.

Pacha giggles, “I've never been hugged by a little girl before! It feels tickly!” “And we've never met a talking tree before!” Tooka says, cheerfully, “So this is an adventure for all of us.” Hearing this, Pacha laughs loudly, making the leaves on his branches glow a brighter green. “What are you two up to today?” Pacha asks. “We're collecting things!” Tooka and Poi say!

Tooka and Poi show Pacha the Tree their bag of flowers, pebbles, and sticky tamarind. “How lovely that you're collecting seeds!” Pacha says. “Do you know I came from one of those little tamarind seeds? And look at me now, all grown up with so many branches and a big family of sparrows and squirrels and crows living with me.” “What do you mean?” Tooka asks. Inji barks enthusiastically. Bow! Bow! Bow! Inji said but Tooka is sure it sounds like “How? How? How?”

“Those seeds you're collecting,” Pacha explains, “They're all tree babies.” “They are?” Poi asks, her eyebrows scrunched into squiggly black lines. “Do all seeds grow into tamarind trees?” Poi asks, trying to remember how many seeds she has at home. “Oh no!” Pacha replies. “Seeds grow into all sorts of things.” “Do you have any fruit in your bag?” Pacha asks. Tooka nods and pulls out a small, red apple and a soggy banana.

“There you go!” Pacha says, excitedly. “Now bite into the apple until you reach the centre. You'll see little brown seeds sitting there.” “They're like shiny little bugs!” says Poi. “Aren't they pretty?” Pacha asks. “Those little seeds grow into apple trees” “Now break the banana in half and see what you find,” Pacha instructs.

“I see the seeds!” Tooka says excitedly. “They look like a sleeping millipede!” “Seeds come in all shapes and sizes”, Pacha says while Inji gobbles the last of the apple. “Are they all tree babies?” Poi asks. “Yes!” says Pacha. “And they all have a little plant inside, waiting to come out and see the world.”

As Tooka, Poi, and Inji walk home that evening, they look closely at all the trees along the road. How pretty the leaves of the coconut tree look as they dance in the wind. How beautiful the red gulmohar flowers are against the bright blue sky. How nice and rough the bark of the mango tree feels under their palms. And how wonderful that something as big and important as a tree starts out as a teeny, weeny little seed.

Tooka, Poi, and Inji still meet every evening after school. But now, Tooka and Poi collect things in which they can plant the seeds they collect. Old shoes, empty coconut shells, even used plastic bottles — everything can be turned into pots. And every once in a while, they stop by for a chat with Pacha the Tree.

Pacha's Super Seed Guide Hello! I'm Pacha, the tamarind tree, but I go by all sorts of names. I'm called imli in Hindi, puli in Tamil, and tentul in Bengali. Scientists call me Tamarindus indica. Let me introduce you to some of my seed friends. You may have seen them on your dinner plate.

Molagu Common name: Red chilli Scientists call me: Capsicum annum Chillies come in all shapes, sizes, and colours, and are grown all over the world. Its seeds are small, circular, and flat, and add spice to dal and bhaji. Careful when you touch them, they'll make your fingers burn! Kaapi Common name: Coffee Scientists call me: Coffeea Arabica You know the coffee your parents drink every morning? That comes from coffee berries. The seeds from the berries are dried, roasted, and then powdered. Coffee bushes grow best in hilly regions of South India. Chakka Common name: Jackfruit Scientists call me: Artocarpus heterophyllus Berries, apples, bananas, watermelon, and jackfruit — all fruits have seeds in them. Some seeds we cannot eat, like that of the mango. Others, like the jackfruit, are used to make curries after they are soaked in water.

Thenga Common name: Coconut Scientists call me: Cocos Nucifera Nearly every part of the hard, brown coconut is useful to us. The hairy, hard outside part is used to make rope, the fleshy inside is used in food, and the coconut water is a delicious drink, especially when it's hot outside. And the oil that you put in your hair? That comes from the coconut too. Kappalandi Common name: Peanut Scientists call me: Arachis hypogaea All plants love soil, but peanuts love the earth so much that they grow underground. And that's why some people call them groundnuts. These little seeds are packed with goodness and are delicious when eaten raw, steamed, or roasted.

Choru Common name: Ricea Scientists call me: Oryza sativa Rice is one of the most popular grains! It's eaten in more homes in India than any other seed I know. On the plant, rice actually has a rough, brown cover, like a jacket, which keeps the seed inside safe and sound. Chocolate Common name: Chocolate Scientists call me: Theobroma cacao (which means food of the gods) Rice might be the most popular seed, but cacao is definitely the most loved seed of all — especially by Tooka and Poi. The cacao seed is where chocolate comes from. Each cacao fruit has about 30-50 seeds that are roasted and then mixed with sugar and milk to make bars of delightful chocolate.


# The Messy Desk

The Messy Desk It was a damp morning and I was sitting inside watching the rain drops splash onto the sand making it wet and slushy to walk on. I took a glance at my desk...The messiest desk ever! I walked over to it and drew a big sigh and to my great, great, great astonishment, a little ant came up and talked to me! She started out as, “Yuck!”, big welcome speech, I know, right? “Not even an ant can live in this “paradise” if she can't live without a wasp or a roach knocking on her door, just waiting to devour her!”, she spat out in disgust. “Um...Who are you?”, I demanded, nervously hoping she wouldn't have super-natural powers and turn me into some garden lizard. “Oh! where are my manners? I'm Cheenu, the sixth ant of the fifth column, fifty second row, thirty fifth line and ...” “Come on, give me a break! Term holidays just started!”, I thought to myself, getting annoyed at the thought of another math lecture. “And who may you be, oh, four feet tall giant who is standing before me?”, she questioned dramatically. “Oh...I'm Ananya...One millionth person you'd expect to be talking to an ant in this world.”, I murmured, praying fervently that she wouldn't whip out a gun and declare that I was her greatest enemy, like Buzz Lightyear did to Woody in Toy Story 3. “Nice to meet you, Ananya!”, she answered warmly motioning me to shake her antenna. In a minute, she was scurrying across my desk muttering something that sounded like this, “We'll need that thrown away...Ah, yes, a vase here and maybe just a little penholder thing over there, ooh! And a nice little pin-up board on top to remind you to not mess up your desk again. There, perfecto!”. Suddenly, I felt a bright bluish green light grip me and before I knew it, I was whisked away to some unknown land!At first, I was scared, but, when I looked around I just forgot to scream my head off and run away into the horizon. The sky was the brightest blue I had ever seen, the soil was smooth and warm unlike the harsh concrete floor I had been used to, I could smell tulips and lavenders in the fresh air blowing across my face, the crocuses were lovely to just gaze at, the clouds were as white as a brand new layer of snow, the sun shone brightly like a ball of gold. It was breathtaking to behold nature in such a beautiful way! Then and there, I knew that I would never forget this bright blue sky I had seen today. “Enjoying the scenery, are we?”, asked Cheenu, interrupting my pleasant thoughts. “Why have you brought me here?”, I demanded, purposely ignoring her question. “Oh, only because of your desk...”, deliberately letting her voice trail off. “What does this have to do with my desk?”, I questioned, even though I wasn't really surprised. “The only reason why I brought you hear was because there's a clean desk competition held by our mayor, King Antie Anty Anter Antag Anta Anten Antem Antman Antan.”, she replied. “Mr. Antie Anter -wait, what?”, I asked, seriously confused. “We call him King Nine A's.”, she said, smirking at my “slow” thinking process. “Okay...I think.”, I said, a bit unsurely.”Anyways, we have to go enter you into the competition!”, she cried anxiously and grabbed my hand and made me run to wherever she was taking me. “Here we are!”, she cried, sounding a bit nervous but at the same time delighted. I looked up and saw a huge anthill in sitting in front of my eyes, but, this wasn't a normal two feet anthill you'd see on a jungle trek! This anthill was taller than the tallest skyscraper in the world and looked like a fairytale castle, that too, with the most vibrant colors I had ever seen!Cheenu, literally, had to pull me inside as I was so awe-struck by this humongous building made by such tiny things of which we don't take any notice in our lives. When I entered the anthill, or rather the castle, I saw thick red carpets strewn on the floor, portraits and photographs of very posh looking ant ladies with beehive hair-dos, ant sports jocks in sweatshirts with bandanas on their pimple sized heads, ant duchesses and dukes in princely robes holding scepters and curtsying , and old ant grannies in babushkas. I looked ahead and saw an ant dressed in flowing robes, his hair slightly greying, sitting on a throne, holding a scepter in his right hand and the other hand cautiously moving to his decorated sword hilt, with a wise look on his face. “Greetings Your Royal Antiness! I have come from the sixth house on Antsfort Avenue in the Desk of Danger and Disgustingness to enter Ananya, um, I mean, this human, standing beside me, into the Desk Competition on the fifth day of the fifth month of the fifth year of the fifth century, um, I mean twenty first century!”, she announced proudly and a bit nervously, bowing down before King Nine A's. “Rise Cheenu, ant from the sixth house on Antsfort Avenue! This human will be allowed to participate in the fourth competition of all ants from the Desk of Danger and Disgustingness which is on the fifth day of the fifth month of the fifth year of the twenty first century!”, he declared grandly. “Yes!”, both of us chorused, slapping a high-five onto each other's palm/sole. When we got back to the human world the first thing I did was stare at my desk for about a millionth of a second before exclaiming, “Cheenu! The fifth of June is tomorrow! How am I supposed to clear this up in one afternoon and evening put together?!”. She simply smiled and let a shrill whistle escape from her lips. I thought that I would be looking at every single dog in the country, the next minute. But instead, every single bird and insect were hopping onto my “oh so messy” desk. “Tweet, tweet! What can we do for you?”, asked one of the sparrows, curtsying cheerfully. “All you have to do is clear up and decorate “Madame Messy's” desk.”, she replied, glancing so sternly at me that I started to shift uncomfortably, ashamed of my “cleanliness”. “Ooh! I love cleaning things up!”, cried out a few beetles and spiders. “Great! Now, let's not be desk potatoes, and get some work done!”, said Cheenu, encouragingly. “Huzzah! Huzzah! It is time do something! Huzzah! Huzzah! But, hide when the telephones go ‘ tring'! Huzzah! Huzzah! We love cleaning up! Huzzah! Huzzah!None of us are lazy grumps!”, they all chimed into what was, probably, their “Clean up, clean up, everybody clean up!”. “In a few extremely short hours my desk was the most “natural” looking desk on earth! Mrs. Chibby and Mrs. Chuzzette, the lovely old spiders spun detailed spider webs on the top and corners of my desk, Amanda and Miranda, the weavers, had built pen holders out of their funky nest material and John and Gabby, the beetles, had made glow-in the-dark paper ball lamps hanging from the top! It was awesome and I seriously wished that I had thought of taking a snap using the photo booth app in my laptop! The next day, we presented it and got second place, because some brainy ant computer jock had made a desk out of a computer and attached automatic iTunes to it. But still, I was the winner in the eyes of the cool beetles, wasps, ants, sparrows, parrots and macaws who helped me. Later, as usual, we had to say goodbye. I almost cried like a baby, that day! Cheenu bid a silent farewell and entered her home on Antsfort Avenue in the Desk of Dazzlement and Daintiness. She still visits me every now and then and we take crazy selfies and have some fun during those special moments. Who knows? You might be the next one to find yourself talking to an ant!


# Sailing Home

Basava and his sister Sundari sat on the sand watching the sun rise over the sea. Slowly, the sky turned from grey to blue and the edges of the clouds became an orange colour. They sat staring at the horizon – that line in the distance where the bowl of the sky seemed to curve down to meet the sea. Their father was a sailor who had sailed away on a merchant ship many months ago. The children were eagerly waiting for him to come back home. So, every morning at sunrise, they came and waited by the beach hoping to see the tall red sails of their father's ship rise slowly above the horizon. The children had seen many ships come and go because they lived in Mamallapuram, which was a busy port. The ships came from many distant lands carrying exciting cargo – chests of silk and pottery, jars full of wine, perfumes and even horses. Their father's ship had sailed out carrying logs of cedar and sandalwood, and bags of spices, rice and ghee. “It's been so many months,” Sundari said sadly, “Appa has never been away for so long.” “Remember that big storm last week?” Basava added worriedly, “The sea was full of high waves. I hope Appa's ship is safe.”

“Look, a ship is coming!” said Sundari excitedly, “But I can't see the sails.” As they watched eagerly, a ship appeared on the horizon. It was a small dot that slowly grew larger as it came closer. First, they saw the sails filling out with the wind. Then the high masts and the wooden bow rose into view. “No,” said Basava, disappointed, “Appa's ship has red sails with a flying eagle painted on them. This one has black and green sails.” They felt disappointed and decided to go home. They had work to do — they had to help their mother at her vegetable stall in the market. Their father was often away from home and after a while all the money he left behind would get over. That is why their mother sold vegetables, so that they had enough to eat. Sundari enjoyed working at the vegetable stall. The market was such an interesting place! Often their customers were sailors from different lands – some with pale skins and narrow tilted eyes and some with dark skins and curly hair. They wore odd clothes and jewellery and spoke in languages Sundari could not understand at all!

This morning, as Basava was laying out bundles of spinach and cabbage, one of their regular customers came to buy vegetables. She was the wife of a trader who often sent spices to other lands by ship. She knew all about the ships coming and going from Mamallapuram. As she picked through the radishes and beans, the trader's wife asked, “Any news of your father?” Sundari shook her head sadly. “Why don't you go and ask at the jetty where all the ships are anchored?” she said. “Ask what?” Basava leaned forward eagerly. “Ask the sailors if they have seen your father's ship on their way to Mamallapuram. My husband does that quite often when his ships are late.” That afternoon, the children headed towards the main jetty. They went through the market and took the street going towards the sea. They went past the warehouses where the merchants kept the goods meant to be loaded into ships. In one warehouse, labourers were unloading bags of pepper and coriander seeds. In another, they were stacking up bales of cotton cloth woven in bright colours.

Three ships stood anchored at the jetty, tied to the shore by thick ropes. Two more ships were waiting out at sea. Small boats were moving in and out among them with the boatmen selling everything from flowers and fruits to beads and woodcarvings. Among the ships anchored at the jetty was the ship with the black and green sails that they had seen in the morning. They went towards a ship that was being loaded with goods. As they neared it, a soldier carrying a spear stopped them. “Halt! Watch where you are going!” the man yelled. “No one is allowed on this ship without a royal permit.” “Permit?” Sundari looked puzzled. “Why?” “Because it is a royal ship, you silly girl!” “You mean this ship belongs to the royal navy?” Basava's eyes widened in surprise. “Are we going to war?” “Of course not! This is a trading ship. His Majesty King Narasimha Varman owns many ships that trade with far off kingdoms. This one is going to the port of Tamralipti in the north.” “We are looking for a ship that has come from the kingdom of Kamboja...” Sundari began hesitantly.

“Our father is a sailor and he sailed for Kamboja many months ago. We want to ask the sailors if they have seen his ship.” “Kamboja?” the soldier asked. He then pointed to the ship with the black and green sails and said, “That ship's arrived from there.” Basava and Sundari ran to the ship, up the gangplank and on to its deck. They stopped when they saw that all the sailors on board were foreigners. They were speaking to each other in a strange tongue! “Oh no!” Basava sighed. “How do we make them understand us?” “Easy!” Sundari grinned. “We talk to them like Amma does when they come to buy vegetables.” “Of course!” laughed Basava, “We act and make signs with our hands.” They looked around trying to spot a sailor with a friendly face. Finally, they went up to a sailor sitting on a roll of rope. He was an old man with a dark, leathery, sunburnt face. There were deep lines around his narrow eyes. He wore loose pyjamas, a sleeveless jacket, bright bangles and earrings. “Kamboja?” Sundari asked nervously. The man nodded happily, “Kamboja!” Basava pointed to the sail, then he pointed to the red skirt Sundari was wearing and said, “Ship? Red sail?” The man frowned and shook his head. Sundari tried to explain. She tapped the side of the ship and said, “Ship?” Then she pointed to the sails and to her skirt, “Sail? Red?” The man pointed to the sea and said something in his own language. “Yes! A ship with red sails. Have you seen it?” Sundari asked excitedly. The man looked a bit puzzled. “Our father... Appa!” Sundari was acting out a tall man with a moustache. “Oh!” The man then flapped his arms to mimic a bird flying. “YES!” the children jumped and yelled in delight, “A flying eagle is on the sail!” The man was laughing as he stood up and pulled them by their hands to the other end of the ship. Then he pointed to the horizon where a ship was slowly sailing towards them, its red sails blowing proudly in the breeze. Basava and Sundari were speechless! There, before their eyes, were the familiar high masts, the curving prow, the red sails with flying eagles... “Your Appa is a sailor?” the man asked gently, looking at their delighted faces. “Is he on that ship?” “Oh!” The children stared at him in disbelief. “You can speak our language!” Sundari exclaimed. “A little bit,” the man laughed. “I come to Mamallapuram often. But I did enjoy your acting, especially ‘the tall man with the moustache' part!” Basava and Sundari taught their sailor-friend many new words as they stood at the jetty, waiting happily for the ship to come home.

1. Basava and Sundari lived over 1200 years ago in the kingdom of King Narasimha Varman of the famous Pallava dynasty. The Pallava kingdom extended over present-day Tamil Nadu. 2. The town of Mamallapuram is near Chennai and is famous for its temples. At one time, it was a port from where ships sailed to Cambodia, Burma and Indonesia. Kamboja is the ancient name of Cambodia and Tamralipti was a port in Bengal.

3. What did children study in school in the Pallava times? The subjects included logic, law, mathematics, grammar, astronomy, philosophy, the Vedas, economics and politics. 4. Women, especially of noble families, were educated, but were not allowed to study the Vedas. 5. People in the Pallava times dyed their hair, used scented hair oil and perfumes. They even used toothpicks after their meals!


# Marching to Freedom

Dhani knew something exciting was being planned at the ashram, but no one would tell him anything. “Just because I'm nine years old,” thought Dhani glumly. “I'm sure they think I'm stupid. I am not!” Dhani and his parents lived in a very special place. It was Mahatma Gandhi's Sabarmati Ashram near Ahmedabad where people from all over India came to stay. Like Gandhiji, they were all fighting for India's freedom. During their stay at the ashram, they spent their time spinning khadi thread on charkhas, singing bhajans and listening to Gandhiji's lectures. At Sabarmati, everyone had to work – cook and clean, wash clothes, fetch water from the well, milk the cows and goats, and grow vegetables. Even Dhani had a job – he had to take care of Binni, one of the ashram's goats. He quite enjoyed that because Binni was his best friend and he liked talking to her.

That morning, as Dhani fed Binni with fresh grass and changed the water in her bowl, he said, “Something's up, Binni! They all sit and talk in Gandhiji's room. They are planning something. I know it!” Binni chewed and nodded as if she understood. Dhani felt hungry. He headed towards the kitchen, with Binni skipping along beside him. His mother was fanning the chulha, filling up the room with smoke. “Amma, is Gandhiji going somewhere?” he asked. His mother coughed in the smoke and said, “They are going on a march.” “March? Where are they going?” Dhani queried. “Somewhere near the sea. Now stop asking questions and go away Dhani!” his mother said impatiently. “Let me finish the cooking first.” Dhani wandered off to the vegetable garden where old Binda was digging up potatoes.

“Binda chacha,” Dhani sat beside him, “are you going on the march too?” Binda shook his head. Before he could say anything, Dhani eagerly asked, “Who is marching? Where are they going? What is happening?” Binda stopped digging and said, “I'll answer all your questions, but first tie up that troublesome goat. She's chewing up my spinach.” Dhani dragged Binni away and tied her to the lemon tree nearby. Then Binda told him about the march. Gandhiji and some of the men from the ashram were going to walk through Gujarat to reach the sea at a place called Dandi. They would walk through villages and towns for a whole month. Once they reached Dandi, they would make salt. “Salt?” Dhani sat up and frowned. “Why will they make salt? You can buy it in every shop!” “I know,” Binda laughed. “But Mahatmaji has a plan. You know he always marches to protest against something, right?” “Of course I know. He leads the Satyagraha marches to fight the British government and win freedom for India. But why is he protesting about salt? It's silly!” “It's not silly at all, Dhani! Do you know we all have to pay a tax on salt?” “So what?” “Everyone needs salt... that means, every Indian, even the poorest, has to pay this tax,” explained Binda chacha. “That is really unfair!” Dhani's eyes were hot with anger. “Of course it's unfair. Not only that, Indians are not allowed to make any salt either. Mahatmaji has asked the British to stop the tax, but they have refused. So he has decided to walk to Dandi and make salt from seawater.” “Walking for a month!” Dhani brooded worriedly. “Gandhiji will get really tired. Why don't they take a bus or train to Dandi instead?” “Because, if he goes on this long march and walks all the way to Dandi, the news will spread. There will be pictures in the papers and reports on the radio, and people all over the world will know that we are fighting for our freedom. And that will really embarrass the British.” “Gandhiji is clever, isn't he?” Dhani's eyes were shining. “Ah, that he is!” Binda's eyes crinkled with laughter. “He's even written to the Viceroy and told him what he plans to do! The British have no idea what they are in for!” Later in the morning, Dhani wandered up to the hut where Gandhiji was staying and peered in through a window. Inside, many of the ashram people were talking to Gandhiji. Dhani heard them planning the route along which they would walk to Dandi. He was thrilled to see his father sitting among the people. In the afternoon, when the ashram was quiet, Dhani went looking for his father. He found him under a tree, spinning on his charkha. “Pitaji, are you and Amma going on the march to Dandi?” Dhani got straight to the point. “I am going. You and Amma will stay here.” “I am coming with you.” “Don't be silly, Dhani. You can't walk so much. Only the ashram's young men will go.”

“I'm nine and I can run faster than you can!” Dhani replied stubbornly. “You can't stop me from coming with you.” His father stopped spinning and explained patiently, “Only the people who have been chosen by Mahatmaji will go.” “Fine! I'll talk to him then! I'm sure he'll say yes,” said Dhani and marched off. Gandhiji was a very busy man and it was not easy to catch him alone. But Dhani knew exactly when he would have the time to listen – early every morning when he went for a walk around the ashram. The next morning, as the sun came up, Dhani slipped out of bed and went looking for Gandhiji. He found him in the cowshed checking on all the cows. Then he strolled into the vegetable garden to inspect the peas and cabbage and have a chat with Binda.

All the while, Dhani and Binni followed him. Finally, Gandhiji headed back to his hut. He sat down beside his charkha in the verandah and called out to Dhani, “Come here, child!” Dhani ran up, with Binni skipping along. “What's your name beta?” “Dhani, Gandhiji.” “And this is your goat?” “Yes, Gandhiji! This is my friend Binni, who gives the milk you drink every morning.” Dhani smiled proudly and said, “I take care of her.” “Good!” Gandhiji leaned forward. “Now Dhani, tell me why you and Binni have been following me everywhere this morning?” “I wanted to ask you something,” Dhani began nervously. “Can I come with you to Dandi?” Gandhiji smiled, “You are too small, beta. Dandi is 385 kilometres away and only young men like your father will be able to walk with me.” “But you are not young!” Dhani said. “Won't you feel tired?” “I am a very good walker,” Gandhiji replied. “I am a good walker too.” Dhani was adamant. “Ah yes,” Gandhiji looked thoughtful. “But there is a problem. If you go with me, who will take care of Binni? After walking for so long, I will become weak. When I come back, I'll need to drink lots of milk to become strong again.”

“Hmm, you're right, Gandhiji. Binni eats only when I feed her.” Dhani lovingly stroked Binni's head, “And only I know what she likes to eat.” “Exactly! So will you stay in the ashram and take care of Binni for me?” “Yes, Gandhiji, I will,” said Dhani. “And Binni and I will be waiting for you.” “Hmm, you're right, Gandhiji. Binni eats only when I feed her.” Dhani lovingly stroked Binni's head, “And only I know what she likes to eat.” “Exactly! So will you stay in the ashram and take care of Binni for me?” "Yes, Gandhiji, I will,” said Dhani. “And Binni and I will be waiting for you.” Fun facts of History 1. In March 1930, Mahatma Gandhi led the march to Dandi to protest against the tax on salt imposed by the British. Gandhi and his followers walked through Gujarat for 24 days. All along the way, they were welcomed with flowers and songs. Newspapers across the world carried reports about the march. 2. At Dandi, Gandhi and his followers collected salt from the seashore and were arrested. The arrest sparked off the Non-cooperation Movement, and people all over India boycotted schools, colleges and offices. 3. There were 78 volunteers who accompanied Gandhi on the march. They covered a distance of 385 kilometres. 4. The march began on 12 March and ended on 5 April 1930. The youngest marcher was 16 years old. 5. The year 2005 marks the 75th anniversary of the Dandi March.


# Up World, Down World

Fatima loved Sunday afternoons. After a lunch of beans and kofta, Maa would read the newspaper on her favourite chair and Baba would sneak away to take a nap.

Fatima could patter away with her book into the lively green forest near her house. The forest creatures would be sleeping, so it would be just her, curled up in the quiet hug of the forest trees.

Fatima would sit down in the shade of the Arjuna tree and gaze into the leafy Up World. Maa had warned her not to climb the tree's branches. It was safe down below. Fatima didn't know what was in the scary Up World. But that day, Fatima was in for a surprise. As she turned a page, Fatima felt a dull THUMP! on her head. “Ouch!” she yelled, rubbing her sore head. It was a tiny book, barely the size of a pea.

Fatima looked up and saw a furry animal trying to hide behind a bough of leaves. “Hello! Is this book yours?” she asked, peering into the Up World. But she got no answer.

The pea-sized book belonged to Gopa, a young dormouse who lived in the Up World. Gopa's little house, made of soft dry leaves and twigs, was in the Arjuna tree as well. The dormouse had often seen Fatima reading, and loved the yellow ribbons in her hair.

But Gopa's Amma had warned her about the terrors of the Down World. All the animals were fearful of Fatima and other human beings and tried to remain invisible to the Down World.

That Sunday, Gopa had been swinging on her green, leafy hammock and reading. She was about to turn the last page when a strong breeze blew the book out of her small, furry paws. Down it went! It bounced on the branches and floated away. The book fell THWACK! and hit Fatima on her head. Gopa's tail quivered and ears twitched. The Up and Down World should never meet, she thought and bolted home.

Fatima didn't climb the tree but kept squinting and trying to read the book. The letters were too small! Finally, she decided to return the book to the shadowy, furry creature. Fatima was really clever – next Sunday she tied five shiny, red balloons around her waist and suddenly, she was floating up. To the Up World! Up, Up, and Up went Fatima, until she reached the tree tops.

Gopa was brushing her bushy tail when she spotted five, shiny red balloons! “Oh, balloons! Maybe it is someone's birthday,” she thought excitedly. But what was this? There was the girl with the yellow ribbons attached to the shiny, red balloons. “Run, run away!” squeaked Gopa, “The Down World humans are here!”

But Fatima was faster. Fatima offered Gopa the book and asked, “Is this yours?” Gopa grabbed the book quickly and smiled. Fatima giggled. She caught Gopa staring at her ribbons and tied one in a neat bow around her tail. Fatima and Gopa held hands and went off exploring!

Fatima and Gopa ran and skipped over the gaps in the trees of the canopy forest. They bugged Baankey the fruit bat, who was sleeping upside down. Baankey did not like being poked. He grunted grumpily, and flapped away to the next branch. “These kids will never let me rest,” he thought. Soon he was away in Dreamsville, where he was hanging out in a fig tree, biting into the fleshy, sweet fruits.

Gopa helped Fatima hop over the long lines of weaver ants who were too busy to even stop and say hello. With long spindly legs and bubble-shaped bodies, the weaver ants scampered all over the tree. These ants love teams! They work together to stitch large leaves into cozy nests.

Next, they bumped into Firki the canopy frog. “He looks like a rainbow,” thought Fatima. “Yellow feet, red eyes, and a blue body!” Firki was so surprised to see a human in his canopy that he almost let go of his strong grip on the branch! He croaked a weak hello and turned to pounce on his lunch – a grasshopper! “I thought only the Down World had frogs,” said Fatima, who loved chasing frogs around her house pond.

Hari the Hornbill was watching them from a distance. He really wanted to be friends with them! Hari was a friendly bird but he made very loud noises, which is why some animals kept him at a distance. But Gopa and Fatima didn't mind at all.

“The Up World isn't so scary after all,” thought Fatima. “How silly I was.” “The people from the Down World are pretty cool,” thought Gopa. “I am not frightened anymore.”

“Sob! Sniff.” “Uh, oh, I think Vaidya is crying,” said Gopa. Her sharp ears picked up sounds easily. The two friends hurried towards Vaidya, a green vine snake, who was very shy.

“What is wrong, Vaidya?” asked Gopa. Vaidya sobbed, looking greener than usual. “They cut down the tree that was my home. Now I don't know where to go,” he cried. Baankey, Dipu and other animals also popped out of their homes. Vaidya was homeless. “A new, concrete road is going to be built and humans cut down my tree,” wailed Vaidya. Cutting down their home! The Up World was alarmed and upset.

“We must help Vaidya,” said Gopa. Fatima, Gopa and their new friends formed a search party. They searched and searched and found a snug tree-hole home for Vaidya. Fatima layered the home with soft leaves and orange flowers, Vaidya's favourite colour. Vaidya loved his new home. “I can't believe I have so many friends! We need to have a party,” he said.

And what a party it was. Everyone got their favourite food. Gopa got nuts, Hari got fruits, Baankey was too sleepy to get anything, the ants brought home-stitched, leafy cushions to sit on! Nobody wanted Firki's grasshoppers. As for Fatima, she had to get the balloons. For the first time ever, the Up World and the Down World were just One World.

Meet Fatima's Friends in the Up World Gopa and her friends live in the vast forest canopies of India. That means they don't live in the Down World, like us human beings. Instead they live in the Up World, in the swinging branches and swaying leaves of trees. Many creatures that live in forest canopies are now used to living in tree tops. If you're lucky you will spot some of them, but most of these animals know how to hide themselves cleverly. So you have to be patient! When scientists go to learn about these canopies, they have to use ropes or ladders, because the trees are very tall. Some even use very large hot-air balloons to get up there. You can imagine just how Up Fatima had to go with her balloons.

Here are some of the animals who living in forest canopies: Malabar spiny dormouse: This bushy-tailed animal likes to live in trees in quiet, undisturbed forests. It loves to eat fruits and nibbles on pepper sometimes. This dormouse sleeps like a hedgehog, curled up with its tail protruding OUT. Hornbill: These birds are vividly coloured with long and strong beaks. These sociable birds love to eat fruits, insects and even small animals. They make nests in holes in trees and when they have babies, they make a mud wall to cover up the hole, much like making a house!

Green vine snake: A bright green, slender tree snake that hides in the leaves of a canopy. It moves very slowly. You can find them not only in India but also Sri Lanka, Bangladesh, Burma, Thailand, Cambodia and Vietnam. Tree frog: There are several kinds of tree frogs and they come in various colours. They can have white lips or red or yellow eyes and brown feet. They are usually very small, half the size of your palm, because they have to jump around delicate branches. They spend most of their lives up in the trees. Fruit bat (aka Megabat): They hang upside down. Try to imagine what the world looks like to them! They love to eat fruits and being busy in the trees. They can be super noisy too. You can hear them from a long way off. They have keen senses of sight and smell and are very helpful to us because they pollinate the flowers and fruits we love.


# Manikantan Has Enough

Mani put his Schoolbag down on the Coffee Table and groaned. His shoulders hurt, but his head hurt even more. It had been a long day. The Amulet around his neck flashed once. “Manikantan, put your Schoolbag where it belongs,” said the Coffee Table. “Yes Manikantan,” agreed the Schoolbag, “I don't belong here. I suggest you put me in your Room in a proper place.”

Mani knew better than to argue. He picked up the Schoolbag and trudged towards his Room. He put away his Schoolbag on the Desk, kicked off his Shoes, and then lay down on the Bed. He groaned. “Are you not feeling well, Manikantan?” asked the Room. “I'm fine. Leave me alone.” Mani moved the Amulet to the back of his neck. He longed to throw it into the Trash. The objects in the House would still be able to spy on him but at least they wouldn't be able to talk to him. “You groaned twice.” The Room's voice sounded muffled. “Do you have a headache, Manikantan?” “Leave me alone.” Then after a pause, Mani added, “Yes.” “Tsk, tsk. So sorry to hear that, Manikantan.” The Room sounded very sympathetic. “I have let your Amma know. Perhaps you are hungry. That may be why you're having a headache. How about a nice hot cup of chai and some pakodas?”

Chai and pakodas would be nice, though Mani wished the Room hadn't told amma he had a headache. Now she would worry. “Okay.” “Great. I have told the Kitchen. And Manikantan, put your Shoes in the ShoeRack.” “Yes,” said the ShoeRack, “I have plenty of space. Waiting.” Mani knew he should get up, but he didn't feel like it. Maybe he should just sleep a little. He was so tired. “Waiting,” said the ShoeRack. Mani closed his eyes and thought of Anandpuram. His Amma called it a village, but to Mani it was home.

He recalled the graceful sway of the tall palm trees and the vast rose-blue sky. In the morning the gentle gusts of wind carried the wonderful smell of porottas cooking over charcoal fires. The winter months were the best. The cool air was nothing like the air-conditioned air in Smart City's buildings.

No, wait, the rainy season was the best! It was such fun to watch the fat heavy warm droplets splish-splosh into the river Periyar. Oh, how he'd enjoyed sitting by the riverbank. So quiet, so peaceful. If only things could go back to the way they had been.

“Waiting,” said the ShoeRack. Mani sat up with a sigh. He didn't mind being given helpful hints, but this was too much. It was almost like being a prisoner and nobody, not even Amma, understood. Mani placed the Shoes on the ShoeRack and headed for the Kitchen. He had to warm the pakodas himself, but the FoodGenie brewed some chai. It tasted exactly like the kind of chai a machine would make. “Is the chai to your satisfaction, Manikantan?” asked the FoodGenie. “As good as cow urine.” “Thank you.”

Mani's Amulet beeped. It was his mother. She wanted to know whether he was feeling better. “How is your headache, kanna?” Her loving voice made Mani feel very sorry for himself. “The headache's better, Amma. How's work?” “Wonderful. It's not like my old Anandpuram job at all. How was your day, kanna?” “Great.”

His Amma worked so hard, such long hours, worried so much about him, cared so much. She was his mother and father and all the family he had in the world. He just didn't have the heart to tell the truth. “I had a great day.” “You sure, Mani? Your SchoolBag told me you were sent to the Principal. What was that about?” “Nothing.” “Mani?” “Nothing! You can ask the Schoolbag. It seems to know everything.” “Mani, what's the matter? Look, why don't you go to the Mirror? I want to see you. Whatever the problem is, we can solve it.”

“No, we can't solve it!” Mani felt tears beginning to form. He tried to press back the tears but they kept coming like the rain on Periyar. He knew the House would report to his mother that her son was crying. Everything he did was watched and reported. He knew it was all for his own good and he knew Amma loved him, but sometimes, he wanted things to be. He closed his finger around the Amulet, and pulled the chain so hard, it snapped. Mani threw the Amulet into the Trash, and ignoring its shouting, ran out of the apartment. Mani didn't know how long he ran or where he went or how exactly he got lost.

Without the Amulet to guide him, he simply didn't know where he was going. But the smart objects of the City had guessed he was lost and alerted the proper authorities. After his mother had thanked the nice policeman who brought him back, Mani took the Amulet from her. He was ashamed but also really glad to be back. “I have adjusted some of the settings,” said his mother. “The House will now give you a little more privacy. But it is really for your own good, Mani.” “I know,” mumbled Mani. “So how was it, your little adventure?” Mani shuddered. The streets had been filled with people but they were all somehow different. They were all strangers. With the Amulet, the streets were filled with many people he almost knew. Their names, the kind of music they liked, who their friends were, lots of fun stuff like that.

Without the Amulet even simple things, like crossing the streets, had become difficult. There was no voice to tell him: “You can cross now, Manikantan.” And nobody knew him either. When he had passed the poster for the movie 'Mission Maut', the hero of the movie Vikram Seven said: “Hi, do you like action movies?” If he'd had the Amulet, Vikram would have said: “Hey Manikantan, nice to see you again, yaar, let's talk.”

Without the Amulet, every object was as stupid as a stone.

“I thought so,” said his mother, with a small smile. “Now Mani, you know you shouldn't have left the House without the Amulet? We were so worried!” “I'm sorry I broke the rules, Amma.” “That's not always a bad thing, kanna. But you are a big boy now. You have to be more mature. Our life here is pretty happy, na?” Mani thought of Anandpuram. An Amulet would be pretty useless in Anandapuram. Maybe that wasn't such a good thing. He nodded. His mother was very sweet. She prepared dinner by hand — well, mostly by hand, the FoodGenie helped, just a little.

Then she read him a story as he drank his milk. Later she tucked him into bed, gave him a good-night kiss, and touched her Amulet to his. He could tell Amma was very tired. “Good night, Amma.” “Good night, kanna.”

“Good night, Manikantan, good night, Amma,” whispered the House. “Sleep tight, and I won't let the bedbugs bite.”

The Internet of Things Does your alarm clock know that you have exams tomorrow? Will it remind you to set the alarm so that you can get up early to do a final revision? If you are going somewhere and get lost, can your shoes give step-by-step directions? Of course not. Today, most of the objects we are surrounded are just objects. They don't really know anything about you or the objects in the house. The clock is just a clock. The radio is just a radio. The clock does not know what the radio does and vice versa. They are not connected to you or to other people or to the objects in the world. But things are about to change. Soon, all human-made objects will be interconnected. They will be more aware of what is going on around them. They will be smarter. They will be able to exchange data and keep track of your needs in a better way. When objects get interconnected and can communicate with each other, as if by an invisible telephone network, we say we have an Internet of Things. If it were up to you, would you like to live in Smart City or in Anandpur? Why?

What if they all started talking? Count the number of objects in your home or classroom (door, chair, clock, radio, books, etc.). Are you surprised by the number? Imagine how it would be if they could all see and hear and speak. How would your life change?


# The Elephant Bird

Munia knew that the giant, one-feathered elephant bird had not swallowed the horse. Yes, he was big enough to swallow a horse, but that didn't mean he had! The village of Adhania had only one horse-cart pulled by the two horses Vayu and Drut. And Vayu had gone missing near the lake in the jungle where the bird lived. The villagers had known about the elephant bird for generations.

He was the last of his race, which was considered extinct for hundreds of years. The world did not know that the living relic of that race, who had lost all his feathers but one, still roamed the jungles of Adhania. The bird and the villagers kept a safe distance from each other. But not Munia. Although she walked with a limp, she was brave of heart. She often slipped into the jungle to watch the elephant bird.

The elephant bird came near the lake in the daytime to bask in the sun or play in the lake alone splashing water. Sometimes he sat half-submerged in water. At other times there was no trace of him. Perhaps he just rested in some corner of the dense jungle. He stood as tall as a tree. He had a long strong neck, huge legs with claws and a heavy spear-like head. His long talons and nails looked scary.

But Munia soon realised he was a shy herbivorous bird. He just munched on leaves by the lakeside. Munia felt she had something in common with him. The elephant bird could not fly and Munia could not run! Other village children mocked her limp and did not include her in their games. That was why she liked staying alone.

Every morning Munia helped fetch three pitchers of water from the village well, and collected wood so that Amma could light the stove. And then she would be out for a long time. Amma believed she went out to play with the kids. Little did she know that Munia went into the jungle to the lake where the elephant bird lived.

One day, gathering courage, Munia stepped in the open near the lake. Without turning his head the elephant bird rolled his eyes towards Munia and then closed them, uninterested by her advance. Getting no more attention than the flies buzzing over his head, Munia stomped her feet. Suddenly the elephant bird lifted one of his claws. Munia cried and fell headlong into the shallow waters of the lake. She came out drenched to see him shaking all over. He was laughing!

“That's funny, huh?” she asked angrily and turned to leave. Before Munia had walked away from the clearing, something hit her feet. It was a fruit that the elephant bird had thrown at her. The elephant bird wanted to play! Hesitantly, Munia threw it at him. He trotted sideways and caught the fruit in his beak. Thus, Munia's friendship with the elephant bird had begun. And just when she had finally found a friend, Vayu had gone missing! And everyone's suspicion had turned towards the elephant bird.

After searching for Vayu high and low, the villagers gathered under the old banyan tree. Everyone agreed that there could be no thief in Adhania. They all trusted one another. The milkman swore that he had seen Vayu gallop away towards the lake. “There is no sign of Vayu anywhere. It must be something in the jungle that got him,” a villager addressed the headman. “Who else can it be but the giant one-feathered elephant bird? He must be destroyed!” said the milkman. “For years he has been lying silent, hatching his evil plans!”

The crowd agreed. Munia watched the proceedings quietly. She wanted to speak, but was scared of being punished for speaking up. Even if she spoke, who would believe her? “Yes, all these years of aimless living has made the giant dangerous,” said Munia's father. “Today it is a horse, tomorrow it may be our children...” The headman spoke over the villagers' angry shouts, “Brothers, even though we are facing a giant, we have the strength of numbers. So let us go out and finish him!”

A cheer of approval went up. “The elephant bird did not eat the horse,” Munia said softly but firmly, limping forward. “I was with him when Vayu went missing!” A heavy silence fell on the gathering. “What does this mean?” roared the headman. “That the elephant bird is my friend, and he has not done this!” “This girl has lost her mind!” shouted someone from the back. The other children laughed. “He only eats leaves! How can he eat Vayu?” Munia shouted, not moving from her place.

“You can't even plait your hair and you are giving us advice?” Munia's father fumed and came towards her. “Go play with your friends!” “This elephant bird is the only friend I have,” said Munia. Her father glared at her. But she didn't cry and stood there facing the villagers. “Forget about the girl, we will get the elephant bird in the morning,” said the headman and the gathering dispersed.

Munia had only one night to prove the elephant bird's innocence. “Think, Munia, think!” she whispered to herself. “The milkman saw Vayu gallop away on the road that goes to the lake. But the road takes a turn before it reaches the lake and goes towards Chandesara. What if Vayu had gone that way?” Munia's parents were angry with her and sent her to bed without speaking a word. Once they were asleep, she got out of bed, took the hanging lamp and stepped out of the house.

She crossed Adhania, and came to the jungle path leading to Chandesara, the neighbouring village. Whoooo... rang the call of an owl in the jungle air. A jackal howled from a distance. The shadows of trees moved like long dark fingers. She hesitated for a moment but then thought of the elephant bird sleeping peacefully in the jungle. If she didn't do something to solve the mystery, the elephant bird may not be alive to see the next night. She took a deep breath and limped alone on the jungle path in the dead of the night.

The next morning the villagers gathered near the lake with sticks, sharp stones and long kitchen knives. The elephant bird was resting when the crowd approached him. The sun shone on his featherless back. He got up slowly and stared at the crowd. Looking at his size, the villagers stopped at some distance. After a moment's hesitation the headman cried, “Be ready!” The mob roared, firming the grip on the weapons, ready to run down the giant one-feathered elephant bird.

“Stop!” Munia's thin voice cut through the din. She limped between the mob and the giant. “Munia! Come back at once!” her father ordered. “Grab her!” cried someone else. Munia's father and another villager rushed towards her. The elephant bird advanced a couple of steps and they stopped. “Okay... if this is how you want it, we'll tackle both of you together!” yelled a man, holding a spear.

“What's going on?” someone shouted from behind the crowd. A slightly hunched man with a long beard came in holding a horse's reins. The headman asked with a surprised look, “Saarthi, what are you doing here? And why is Vayu with you?”

“Oh, as you know, I had sold Vayu to you some years back. Yesterday I was passing by your village early in the morning in my buggy pulled by Jhabru and Ghabru – Vayu's brothers. I don't know how Vayu got loose and followed us back to Chandesara! I couldn't recognize him and didn't know what to do with him until this morning when I saw this little girl going from hut to hut, asking about a lost horse. But what is going on?” he asked again.

The villagers did not answer Saarthi. They hung their heads in shame. Munia's father went to her, lifted her in his arms and took her back to the village. Since that day, no child laughed at Munia's limp. They all wanted to be friends with her. And they all wanted to be friends with the elephant bird. Munia's tale reached many villages and the villagers in faraway hamlets whispered to each other, “Munia knew that the giant one-feathered elephant bird had not swallowed the horse!”

This story is inspired by the real Elephant Bird (scientific name: Aepyornis maximus), the biggest bird that walked our planet. It inhabited the island of Madagascar. With more and more settlements on the island, and more forests ruined, the species became extinct around 1700 CE.


# Jadav and the Tree-Place

This is Jadav, a tree-planter. He loves tree-places because they are full of life. No-tree-places make him terribly sad, because they are full of dead things.

Years ago, Jadav was walking along the banks of the great Brahmaputra River when he arrived at a big, empty no-tree-place. It was dry and hot. The sand was powdery and striped.

Striped sand? How odd. Jadav went closer to take a better look. Oh, but they weren't stripes at all! The ground was covered in snakes! Last night's floods must have washed them ashore, Jadav thought.

These snakes weren't slinking and slithering and swaying about like regular, healthy snakes. When Jadav walked among them, they didn't hiss or run away or try to bite him. They just lay about like old ropes, tired and still. "Poor snakes! They're dying from the heat! If only they had some shade to lie in! If only this no-tree-place had some trees in it!"

Jadav couldn't bear to watch the snakes die. It made him so terribly sad that he sat down and began to cry. But he quickly came to his senses. "No more crying. From now on: only trying!" He jumped up, ran back to his village and began collecting all the bamboo shoots he could carry in his bag. "Regular plants won't grow in the hot sand, but bamboo will. Bamboo is strong!"

Jadav brought the shoots to the no-tree-place and started planting them everywhere. It was hard, hot work, and it took years. The river grew thin one summer and flooded the next, sometimes bringing more sand and sometimes taking it away. Heavy rains came and went. But Jadav kept on planting.

In time, the bamboo took root and began to grow. As it grew, it brought shade, and the shade brought insects. The insects burrowed into the ground, and the earth below the bamboo trees began to change. The dry and white became rich and brown, and the dead sand became living soil. Jadav was no longer sad. But he wasn't happy either. He looked around his bamboo grove and thought, "A few-trees-place is nice, I know. But how wonderful it would be if this were a many-trees-place!" The idea thrilled him. So Jadav went back to his village and began collecting many more seeds and saplings. He filled three big bags with Arjun and ejar and gulmohar and koroi and moj and himolu. "Now that our few-trees-place has lovely brown soil, we can plant all these and more!"

Jadav brought his new saplings and seeds to the few-trees-place and planted them all around. It was hard work, his back hurt, and it took many years. The orange and blue skies turned purple and pink, and villages became towns. The wind grew laden with dust, and the river became grey. But Jadav's insect friends helped to till the soil, and his tall bamboos gave him shade and cooled the air. And Jadav kept on planting.

Soon, his Arjun, ejar and gulmohar, his koroi, moj and himolu, and all his many other plants dug in, took root and started growing. As they grew, they spread new seeds, and the new seeds, in turn, took root. Shoots became trunks, trunks grew branches, and the branches reached for the sky.

The few-trees-place that was once a no-tree-place now became a wonderful, green many-trees-place. But what's a many-trees-place without many tree-creatures? When one came, the others followed.

First, came the birds. They flocked and flew in from near and far, to make their nests in Jadav's tree-place. There were vultures and pelicans and storks and ducks. And warblers and thrushes and wagtails and chats.

Next, came the animals. They skipped and swung and sauntered in, to make their homes in the many-trees-place. There were buffaloes and deer and rabbits and gibbons. And elephants and tigers and rhinos.

Finally, there came the snakes. They slithered and swayed and sashayed in, to cool themselves in the shade of Jadav's trees. When Jadav saw the snakes, he sat down and cried happy tears. He was so happy that he wasn't even afraid of getting bitten.

Jadav's tree-place had filled with feathers and beaks and wings, with claws and tails and fangs. There were spots and splashes, stripes and flashes, and green, green, everywhere. The tree-place was a forest, at last. And Jadav was a happy man. Then Jadav had another thought. "Many trees in one place is good, I know. But how wonderful it'd be if there were many trees in every place!" So he grabbed his bags of seeds and started walking across the world. And as he walked, Jadav started planting the seeds in all the no-tree-places he saw. And he planted. And planted. And planted. But there are so many no-tree-places in the world. There are more no-tree-places than tree-places now. This is terribly sad, but Jadav does not sit down and cry this time.

Jadav plants.

And plants. And plants some more. It's going to be hard work, bringing all the old forests back. The seas have begun rising, and the winds grow cold. Towns have become cities, and Jadav is growing old. But he keeps on planting. And planting. And planting.

Jadav will keep on planting until the whole world is a happy, lovely lots-of-trees-place.

Jadav in Real Life Jadav ‘Mulai' Payeng is a conservationist and recipient of the Padmashree, one of the highest civilian honours awarded by the Indian government. Jadav lives in Majuli, Assam. At the age of 16, distressed by the sight of dying snakes that had washed up on a sandbar banking the Brahmaputra, Jadav decided to plant some trees in the spot. He started small, with bamboos, and grew an entire forest, plant by painstaking plant. This was back in 1979. Over the next three decades, Jadav and his tree-planting have managed to change the soil in the barren area. The 550-hectare sandbar is now a lush, dense forest and home to a variety of flora and fauna, including elephants, tigers, apes, deer and many species of local and migratory birds. Jadav continues to visit and nurture his forest every day, planting wherever he finds empty patches.

Growing Up With a Mango Tree: a Tree-Planting Activity Just ate a mango? Loved it? Want another? You can go to a shop and buy one, of course. But it's a lot more fun (and free!) to use the seed of the mango you just ate and make a few fruits of your own. All you need is time and patience. First, find a nice patch of empty land near your house. Get a friend, sibling or grown-up to help you plant the seed you saved in that patch. Make sure the soil is loose and there's plenty of sun. It may take several weeks of waiting, watering and watching before your seed turns into a plant, so don't worry and definitely don't hurry. Once your seed germinates and grows into a healthy mango plant, get ready for a lot more waiting, watering and watching. Take care that your plant doesn't get eaten up by insects or animals, or get stepped on by someone. If all this waiting is making you feel bored, read a few books, sing some songs, and plant some more plants! After a few years, as you grow taller, your mango plant will grow tall with you, until it becomes a big tree that you can climb and picnic under. This is when the real fun begins. By now, your tree will have started making its own mangoes, which you and your friends can eat. Even better, those mangoes will soon start attracting other mango-loving creatures to your tree: birds, ants, squirrels, bats, monkeys, spiders and lots more. Some of these creatures will come to eat the fruit, some will come to feed on the tree's sap, some to drink nectar from its flowers, and some creatures will even come to eat some of the other creatures hanging around the tree. But it's not all about eating. Some creatures may come just to rest in your tree's shade, or to take a nap in its branches. Your tree has many different uses for every different creature! Spend some time every day watching who visits your mango tree, at which time of the day they come, and what they do. Write down what you see in your notebook. Also draw pictures of what you see. See how much you've done and learned with just one mango seed? Isn't tree-planting fun? Now imagine how much fun Jadav must have had planting his entire forest full of trees!
