# Why Does A Poori Puff Up?

Aditi and Aarav love pooris. Halwa- poori, kheer-poori and shreekhand– poori. Yummy! Chhole-poori or aaloo-poori. finger-licking good! Pooris are tasty, whatever you may eat them with! The smell of pooris frying! Oh, so wonderful. The sight of pooris swimming in hot oil! One look at golden, crispy, hot, puffed pooris and Aditi and Aarav rush to get the roundest and the most puffed ones. But how does the poori puff? Is there air inside? Who fills the poori with air? Aditi and Aarav blow air into balloons, to make them puff up. Pa uses a pump to fill air in the tyre of his bicycle.

But Ma doesn't seem to use any of these methods to puff the poori. She just fries them and they puff. Amazing! Aditi and Aarav decide to observe, ask questions and find answers the next time pooris are made at home.

Pa has put some whole-wheat flour in a big dish. He adds a little oil and some salt and starts mixing water into the flour. How come the flour is absorbing the water readily? Well, the reason is, something in the wheat flour is very thirsty! When you are thirsty what do you do? You drink water. Gliadin and Glutenin are the two types of proteins in the wheat. Proteins and all other chemical substances are made up of tiny units called molecules. The molecules in these proteins are very thirsty. As soon as water is put in the flour, these molecules drink it. Then they become big and fat. They expand. Naturally, they don't have enough space to sit comfortably. So they touch and push each other. They actually stick to each other.

Sometimes, you hold each other's hand and make a chain while playing. The whole chain then moves about. Similarly, these molecules stick together and form a network.

Pa has made dough out of the flour. He asks Ma to knead the dough some more. She smears some oil on her palm and starts kneading. You need strong hands to knead the dough. She says if the dough is not kneaded the pooris won't puff. How are these two related? Here is the secret. When you knead the dough, the molecules that are stuck to each other, Now start stretching. When this stretching is complete, a new protein is formed. It is called Gluten. Gluten is elastic like a rubber band and so we can give any shape to that dough. Ma has left the dough aside for some time. She is now preparing the kheer. Aditi and Aarav decide to come back when she starts rolling the pooris.

Now Ma and Pa are ready. Ma has poured oil in the frying pan and has put it on the stove. She pinches off a small amount of dough, and rolls it into a poori. Pa slides the poori into the hot oil. In minutes, the poori has puffed. How did that happen?

Here is what happens to the poori. The rolling is possible due to the Gluten in the dough. When the small piece of dough is rolled, a Gluten sheet is formed in the poori. When the poori is put in the hot oil, its lower surface becomes very hot due to the oil. Do you remember that water was used for making the dough? So, due to the high temperature, the water in the poori turns into steam. This steam is very powerful and it lifts up the sheet of Gluten. And that is why the poori puffs. Pa now turns the poori so that the other surface also turns golden. He has taken the poori out of the pan and kept it in a dish.

Now with the help of a fork let us make a hole in a poori. See the steam oozing out? So the puffed poori doesn't contain air. It has steam in it, right?

Why are the pooris used for bhel-poori, aloo–dahi-poori not puffed? There could be three reasons: If the poori is rolled very thin, there is not sufficient water in it for steam to form and for the pressure to build up so that the poori can puff. Sometimes after the pooris are rolled, thin holes are made in them with a fork so that while frying, whatever steam is created, it comes out of the holes and does not let the poori puff. Such flat pooris can be used for longer. Also if pooris are fried at low temperatures, steam forms very slowly, pressure does not build up and the poori does not puff. Now you know why some pooris puff up, and why some pooris don't!

Experiment to get gluten from wheat flour Make dough using wheat flour and water. Use only adequate amount of water so that the dough would not be too hard or too soft. Use the lower portion of the palm and knead the dough for few minutes. If necessary, little oil can be used so that the dough does not stick to your palm. Leave the dough covered for about ten minutes. Now take a big bowl and put the dough in it after kneading it for few minutes again. Pour water on the dough in the bowl so that it is completely immersed in water. Continue kneading the dough in water till the water becomes white. Throw the water out and put fresh water in the bowl. Repeat the procedure till you observe that a small portion of the dough now remains which when kneaded water does not turn white. This means all the starch from the dough is removed and only gluten has remained. This is because starch dissolves in water but gluten does not. Take out the small portion of the dough which is gluten. You can stretch it like a rubber band. If you stretch it and leave it comes back to original state. This demonstrates the elasticity in it. You can spread it horizontally. This demonstrates the plasticity in it.

Poori facts from history According to scientists, wild wheat originated first in middle east countries about 11,000 years ago. According to the world's first encyclopedia ‘Abhilashitarth chintamani' or Manasollas written in 12th century by King Someshwar, something similar to poori was made at that time but was called as pahalika. So poori is at least 800 years old. Excavation done near Damaskas in Syria revealed wheat dated back 9000 years. Tools necessary for planting and harvesting wheat plants and also for grinding wheat were found at the same sight.

CAN YOU FIND OUT? Can pooris be made from jowar, bajra or rice flour? Why? Apart from pooris, what are the other things we make using wheat flour? What happens if you put too much water in the flour? What happens when you use other methods of cooking flour such as in a tandoor or on a tawa?


# Kaka and Munni: A Folktale from Punjab

In a gulmohar tree along the wheat fields in Punjab, Munni the sparrow, sat by her nest. She watched over her three little eggs, waiting for them to hatch. Munni looked around happily at the bright red flowers, before giving a startled chirp as she saw a flash of black. It was the village bully, Kaka, the crow. "Move over Munni, for I have come to eat your eggs," he cawed.

Now Munni was a clever little sparrow and she quickly chirped back, "Who can refuse you, Kaka? But I have one request. Before eating my eggs, could you please wash your beak, since it is looking very dirty?"

Kaka did not like the idea of not looking his very best. He quickly flew over to the stream and was about to wash his beak in the water, when the stream cried out, “Kaka! Wait! If you dip your beak into me, all my water will become dirty. Go get a cup, fill it with water, and wash your beak in that.”

Hearing this, Kaka went to the potter in the village, and cawed to him, “Oh potter dear, This is Kaka here. A cup you make For me to fill With water to wash My dirty bill So I can eat the eggs And loudly caw To let everyone Hear me and know That I am the most handsome crow.” “I will gladly give you a cup, but I need mud to make one for you,” said the potter.

So Kaka flew over to the nearby field and said to it, “Oh field dear, This is Kaka here. Some mud I'll take For the potter to make A cup to fill With water to wash My dirty bill So I can eat the eggs And loudly caw To let everyone Hear me and know That I am the most handsome crow.” “I am all dry and baked hard, for the monsoon rains are yet to start. Get something sharp to dig me up,” replied the field.

Off Kaka went to the nearby jungle where he saw a deer with sharp horns. He called out to it, “My friend, oh deer, This is Kaka here. Your horn may I take To dig some mud For the potter to make A cup for me to fill With water to wash My dirty bill So I can eat the eggs And loudly caw To let everyone Hear me and know That I am the most handsome crow?” “Oh, you very clever crow, how can you take my horn while I am still alive?” Kaka, terribly hungry, flew around in a flurry till he came across...

...a pair of dogs. “Oh dogs dear, This is Kaka here. I need your help, I fear, To kill the deer Whose horn I shall take To dig some mud For the potter to make A cup for me to fill With water to wash My dirty bill So I can eat the eggs And loudly caw To let everyone Hear me and know That I am the most handsome crow.” “That is a lot of work in this heat,” grumbled one of the dogs. “We need to be strong to kill the deer. Go get some milk for us to drink.”

Back to the village flew Kaka and went to the buffalo munching on some straw. “Oh buffalo dear, This is Kaka here. Could I take your milk To the dogs to feed Whose help I need To kill the deer Whose horn I shall take To dig some mud For the potter to make A cup for me to fill With water to wash My dirty bill So I can eat the eggs And loudly caw To let everyone Hear me and know That I am the most handsome crow?” “If I could get some lovely juicy grass to eat instead of this dry hay, I would certainly give you milk,” mooed back the buffalo.

On hearing this, Kaka swooped over to the only grassy field around and said to it, “Oh grass dear, This is Kaka here. Please come with me For the buffalo is hungry And I need her milk For the dogs to feed Whose help I need To kill the deer Whose horn I shall take To dig some mud For the potter to make A cup for me to fill With water to wash My dirty bill So I can eat the eggs And loudly caw To let everyone Hear me and know That I am the most handsome crow.”

“And how do you plan to cut me?” whispered the grass. “Go get a sickle from the blacksmith and then I can come with you.”

Kaka, really hungry now, went to the blacksmith and said to him, “Oh blacksmith dear, This is Kaka here. Give me a sickle To give the grass a tickle. I will take her with me For the buffalo is hungry And I need her milk For the dogs to feed Whose help I need To kill the deer Whose horn I shall take To dig some mud For the potter to make A cup for me to fill With water to wash My dirty bill So I can eat the eggs And loudly caw To let everyone Hear me and know That I am the most handsome crow.”

The blacksmith, like all the others, wanted to save Munni's eggs. Looking up, he said, “Kaka, please go around the back, open the furnace door and put this piece of iron in it.”

Kaka was very excited and in his hurry, he quickly flung open the furnace door. As he did this, a sudden gust of wind made him fall backwards on the coal, burning his tail. “Oh ho! Mera poonja sadhiya!”“Oh ho! Mera poonja sadhiya!” Which, in Punjabi, meant, “Oh! My tail has got burnt!”

Since Kaka always wanted to look his best, he could not bear to be seen with a burnt tail. So he flew off never to be seen again.

What is a Collage? Each of the pictures that you have seen in this book is a collage (pronounced ko–laaj). Collage is a way of making a whole new picture by putting bits of material together. The material could be handmade and printed paper, like in this book. It could be clippings from newspapers and magazines, old greeting cards, photographs, fabric, ribbons, dried flowers and leaves, or anything else that you find lying around! The word “collage” comes from the French word “colle” meaning “glue”. To make a collage, you need bits of different material, a scissor or a pair of nimble fingers to tear up stuff and lots of glue to stick things together. This page shows the four elements, Wind, Water, Earth and a fiery Sun, and uses bits from paper you can spot in the book. Now go ahead and make your own collage!


# The Duet of Rainmakers

This story happened during the great famine in Rajasthan. The village farmlands all over the state looked like wide spans of desert under the cloudless sky. The Villagers of Jaisalmer were not sure how to bring rain in their part of the village. Even the Traditional Folklore Singer couldn't bring blessings of rain with his heart-moving songs. Eventually, the Folklore Singer decided to travel to the haunted village of Kuldhara to get the help of his Master's spirit. Early next day, the Singer started from his village. He was confident that his wise Master would have a solution for his village's rain problems. He was willing to face any challenge to find a solution. After walking many miles, the Singer saw an object growing big slowly as he walked towards it. When he was close enough, he found a huge bone. Now the Singer was greatly puzzled as to which animal it could possibly be to have such a huge skeleton. He then remembered his Master teaching him a folklore song that brought dead animals to life. So he began singing with great joy and soon with each dip and fall of his song the bones got their life back. Almost at the end of the song the huge bone structure turned to be a creature from the ancient past. The creature was a Dinosaur which looked at him with wide-eyed wonder. The Singer was happy to bring life to the Dinosaur. Now that his work was done, he decided to walk his way to Kuldhara to meet his Master. As he walking away, he heard the loud thumping of the Dinosaur's feet following him. He turned to the creature and said that he should go his way where ever he wishes to go. But the creature would just smile at him and lick his face. The Singer understood the creature is going to follow him all his way. In the end, he decided maybe he could show this creature to his Master after all and took him along with him. The odd pair of the Singer and Dinosaur made their way toward Kuldhara. On the way the Singer would sing a few songs to keep him entertained and the Dinosaur would shake his head and tail keeping with the song's rhythm. Soon they reached Kuldhara at night fall. The Singer walked to his Master's house. At the house, the door opened and all their needs were magically taken care. That night, the Singer placed all the offering that he brought with him at his Master's prayer room altar and awaited his arrival. At the stroke of midnight the Master appeared before the Singer. The Singer bowed before his Master's spirit and asked him for help to solve the rain problem of his village. The Master smiled and said, “You have travelled far, so rest a while. We will talk later tomorrow.” “Master I even tried the rain song folklore too. Yet nothing happened and my people are thinking of leaving the village, please help me master,” cried the Singer in desperation. “I did tell you that we will talk later. So don't worry, your answers will be with you in the morning,” said the Master's spirit. The Singer as per his Master's command slept in house and the next day was getting ready to leave, when he heard someone singing off tune. He searched for the person singing so off-key. A huge surprise waited for the Singer because the off-tune song was sung by the Dinosaur. The Dinosaur on seeing the Singer immediately stopped singing and said, “Did I disturb you?” “You sounded a little off-key but you have a nice voice though,” said the Singer not wishing to hurt the creature's feelings. “Do you think that I can learn to sing?” asked the Dinosaur. The Singer thought of the years of practice that goes into learning to sing. He didn't want to discourage the Dinosaur, so he said, “Yes, you can but you need to be dedicated to singing.” The Singer visited his Master's prayer room altar and took his leave. He found a new rain song folklore wound with a red silken cloth. The Singer read through it and thanked his Master for helping him with a new rain song. He was now had a plan of learning the song and making it rain in his village. As the odd pair of the Singer and Dinosaur walked towards Jaisalmer, the Singer kept practicing the song on the way. The Dinosaur listened attentively to the song and kept time with his stomping. By half the way, the Singer had learned the song as per his Master's notation. So he decided that he would sing it once to see if he got it right. As he was singing, the cloud began to crowd in and they seemed to be ready to rain. When the Singer looked out with hope the rain bearing cloud dispersed without showering rain. The Singer was greatly disappointed. By then, the Singer and Dinosaur had reached traveling nomad's camp and joined them to rest for the night. Once the camp members and the Singer had gone to bed for the night, the Dinosaur began his practice of his new song that he had been learning from listening to the Singer. At one of the high pitches of the song, the sleeping Singer woke up and heard the Dinosaur sing the rain song off-keys. The Singer remembered the time when his Master had spoken about rainmaking songs. “The best rain songs are those that are sung as a duet!” “Maybe this was the solution that Master has been hinting to me so long,” thought the Singer. For the reminder of the way the Singer taught the Dinosaur how to sing the rain making song in tune. When they reached Jaisalmer the whole village was frightened of the huge Dinosaur. But the Singer pacified them and told them it was a gentle and harmless creature who can sing. He also told them that he found a solution for making rain with his singing Dinosaur friend. When the villagers heard that the Dinosaur could help with bringing rain, then, they began laughing and mocking them. Just to prove the villager wrong and to strengthen his faith in his new found friend, the Singer decided to sing the rain song as a duet. The unusual combination of the Singer and the Dinosaur's rain song moved the sky so much that the rain bearing clouds gathered and there fell huge showers of rain with lightening. The rain drenched the village with life-giving water and it was the best reward from the sky to earth for the soul-moving rain song duet. Soon both the Singer and the Dinosaur became famous as a rain making songster pair. So whenever there was a need for rain this pair of odd singers would visit the village and sing their duet to make the sky reward them with showers of rain. - The End -


# Paplu, the Giant

This is the story of a nine-year old giant called Paplu. He was very different from the other giants. They loved to fight, whereas Paplu hated fighting. While his classmates would spend their time twisting the ears of dinosaurs or yanking the tails of tigers, Paplu would be busy protecting his friends. Paplu's mother was worried about her son. One night she woke up Paplu. “Son, you will never be happy staying in our tribe. I am taking you to a village where people are normal human beings. You will stay there with Raghav, the head man.” Just before they reached the village, Paplu's mother asked him to close his eyes. When he opened them, he almost fainted. He had shrunk to one-tenth his size and so had she. Paplu's mother handed him over to Raghav and left.

Paplu soon made friends with the boys and girls of the village. One day Raghav came home very worried. “A ruthless bandit called Angaar has blocked the only way out of our village. We cannot go to our farms to work and will surely starve,” he said. Paplu wished he could help Raghav in some way. Paplu suddenly remembered something. Before leaving the forest, his mother had told him the magic words which would make him a giant once again. And as a giant, he would easily be able to take care of Angaar. Paplu did everything he could, including standing on his head and pulling his own ears, but he couldn't remember those words.

Then Paplu heard a soft lisp. “Paplu paiyaa, play with me, pleath.” It was his two-year old neighbour Soni. Paplu was her best friend. He picked her up and threw her high in the air and she started singing: “Paplu paiyya, Paplu paiyaa thlow me up, cath me quick, Paplu paiyya, Paplu paiyya please show me youll magic thlik.” Paplu froze! These words and the tune sounded very familiar. He rushed inside and came out with a blue stone in his hand. He now remembered what his mother had told him, “Son, throw the stone in the air and say these words: I'll throw you up, I'll catch you quick. Don't forget my magic trick.”

As Paplu threw the stone and recited the words, he felt himself swelling up like a balloon. Suddenly he heard a sound – R-r-rip! R-ri-ip!! His clothes were tearing. If he didn't look for cover, he would soon be standing bang in the middle of the village, in clothes hundred sizes too small for him. All he would have to cover his modesty would be strips of cloth and little else. Paplu rushed into the woods with the sound ‘R-r-rip! Rri-i-p!' chasing him. Once deep into the undergrowth, Paplu got down on his knees. It looked like he had missed a word or two in the magic chant his mother had made him learn. That is why his clothes had not grown along with his body!

What was he to do now? Although he had become a giant, he couldn't venture out on his rescue mission in his birthday suit. He needed clothes urgently. But how was he to get clothes his size and that too, quickly? He heard a voice and looked down. It was Raghav. “Soni told me you had become big and that you had run away somewhere. When I heard this strange story, I came out to investigate.” “Using a magic trick my mother taught me, I have become a giant. Now I can take care of Angaar and his gang,” said Paplu. “That's great, then what are you waiting for?” “My clothes didn't keep pace with my growth. I am wearing almost nothing. How can I come out like this?” Raghav thought for some time and said, “Okay, give me some time. By nightfall, I'll have your clothes ready.”

Raghav went back home and summoned all the tailors in the village. Twenty one tailors appeared in no time. Raghav explained the problem to them and said, “I want a pair of pyjamas and a kurta, to be stitched as soon as possible for Paplu.” Soon ‘Operation Paplu Dress' started. It was quite funny to see the tailors scrambling up Paplu's back, legs and hands to take his measurements. The whole village got into action contributing whatever material they could. Even Soni donated her doll's shawl to the project! In seven hours, the dress was ready. In seven hours, with a whoop of joy, Paplu stood up towering over the villagers. He looked really smart with the multi-coloured kurta and an equally multi-coloured pyjama. There was thunderous applause.

It was just past midnight. Angaar and his men were fast asleep. Only two bandits were on guard. Suddenly Angaar woke up. He could hear a strange sound. He got up and picking up his sword, rushed out of his tent. The other dacoits too were coming out of their enclosures, spears and swords in hand. “Whoosh!” There was the sound again. It seemed to be growing louder and closer. “WHOOSH!” Angaar looked around. A dust storm seemed to be gathering momentum. Trees had started swaying and the noise was slowly becoming deafening. “WHOOSH! WHOOSH!” Angaar felt himself being picked up by the air current. He desperately tried to hold on, flaying his arms and legs, but it was no use. He was flying in the air. To his left, was his deputy Jarnail looking like an ungainly dinosaur. To his right, was his most accomplished swordsman, Talwar, air-borne like his colleagues, desperately trying to reach out for his sword which was flying ahead of him. A few minutes later, there was a splash.

They landed in the river to the south of the village. As they swam to the shore, spluttering and shivering, a huge shadow loomed over their heads. “Angaar, you scoundrel!” the shadow thundered, its voice echoing in the night. “Y...yes,” stammered the dreaded Angaar. He had never been so terrified in his life, since the day his father, Rosh Bundela had walloped him for eating up his jalebis. “This time I have merely roughed you up. Next time, if you or any of your men come anywhere close to the village, I'll rip each and every limb from your bodies and chew them up.” “Y..yes, Maharaj, we will never again come within a thousand miles of this place.”

“Good. Remember, if I hear you are even passing through these parts, I'll make a paste of you and your gang and feed it to the fish in this river.” “Yes, Maharaj. But please, do tell me, who are you? I have never seen you in these parts.” “I am a guardian of this village,” Paplu said. He paused for a good ten seconds and then in his deepest tone said, “And my name is Paplu, the Giant.” And with these words, Paplu stormed back to the village. Angaar and his men left the same night and were never heard of again. Paplu went back to his original shape and size. However, he couldn't get back his original name. No one called him Paplu anymore. To everyone, and even to Soni, he was Paplu, the Giant.


# The Cat in the Ghat!

This story is about an uncle named Sandy, Who likes his camera so much, he always keeps it handy. Let's rewind to when Uncle Sandy was a little boy, Unlike his friends, he never dreamt of a fancy toy.

Lost in books that spoke of magical creatures, Even in class, he never listened to his teachers. As time passed by, Uncle Sandy became a wildlife photographer, While his friends became doctors, engineers and dance choreographers.

Uncle Sandy didn't want to work in big offices, He wanted to take pictures of snakes, crocodiles and tortoises. So he decided to leave his family and friends behind, And took off to the jungles with freedom in mind. On his first expedition to the Western Ghats, He had his first encounter with a mysterious cat. Uncle Sandy has been on its trail ever since, Hoping to click a picture of it, for evidence.

So he decided to revisit the Western Ghats, Through its spiraling path in search of the cat. The cat in the ghat! The plan was to speak to animals along the way, To get clues about this cat whose colour he knew was grey.

He began his journey at the foothills of the Ghats, With the summer sun so hot, Uncle Sandy needed a hat. “Let's look for waterholes,” he said to himself, He knew that's where the animals would tread.

And guess who he got to meet, The top cat himself, Mr. Tiger to greet. “Oh mighty tiger,” he said, “would you have seen a cat? It is tall, swift and the colour of my hat.” The tiger didn't have much to say, He roared and looked the other way.

Phew! That was close, he thought, Just as he was drenched by giant rain drops. Along with the shower came a swarm of termites, Who were sadly eaten by ants, at first sight.

Rains in the Western Ghats come down as waterfalls, Waterfalls become rivers and that's how there's water for all. So, if we need water to drink, Protecting the Western Ghats is the link.

What Uncle Sandy saw next filled him with glee, A family of elephants bathing in a pond, yippee! They were making the most of the pre-monsoon showers, Some were kicking grass, others showing off their powers. “Excuse me you all,” said Uncle Sandy, waving his hat,“Would you have seen a big grey cat?”

“No, no, no,” they all went in chorus, “We haven't seen him around here, we promise.” Uncle Sandy found himself in the rainforest soon, “The second level of the Western Ghats,” he crooned. “Bark!” came a reply through the forest dense. “Oh that's a Barking Deer I hear, it means no offence.”

Up in the trees chomping through a jackfruit, He saw a lion-faced monkey, brute. A Lion-tailed Macaque is what it is, he knew, He'd looked through an encyclopedia of animals, woohoo! “Help me find a grey cat, will you?” said Uncle Sandy.“Okay,” said the feasting monkey.

“Walk straight through the tall green trees Till you find one with a giant hive of bees.” “Under that tree lives a frog so rare It lives underground, hiding from the sun's glare.” “He's a clever frog I'm told, Knows the whole jungle inside out and two-fold.” Uncle Sandy was so eager to look for the froggy He left without saying thank you to the monkey.

Left, right, left, right, Uncle Sandy marched, Walking through a row of trees that were arched. Then he saw a tree very tall With a big beehive that was just about to fall.

“Ribbit ribbit,” said a frog, But Uncle Sandy could not see it through the fog. “Oh you're the man who comes in search of a cat, I heard about you from a clever little bat.” Said Uncle Sandy,“Please will you tell me where he is? I'll give you an exotic flower, an Iris.”

The frog was purple in colour, He's the only one of his kind in India, Nasika batracus. The frog told him that he'd meet a tribesman, Who'd know where the cat lived, and would guide him. Uncle Sandy nodded, still in shock, He had just seen the most extraordinary frog.

As he went further into the forests so thick, He saw that the trees were getting fewer very quick. “People cut trees,” he said, “to make products very cheap, And the poor animals, they have no place to sleep.” “These jungles are their homes you see, just like our houses back in the city.” Sad and disheartened by the state of affairs, Uncle Sandy decided to say a silent prayer.

“Protect these forests, oh dear God, please, Save them so the animals can live in peace.” Saying so he carried on, the high altitude grasslands waiting, And that's where he'd find the cat from its hiding.

The remotest of places in the whole of the Western Ghats, The grasslands so green, Uncle Sandy just sat. Staring at the miracle of creation and the beauty of this place, This, he felt, was really his land of fairy tales. Pat came a tap on his back, He turned to see a face painted black.

“Who are you, Sir?” Uncle Sandy questioned “I am a tribesman who lives here unquestioned.” “Oh but sir, will you be as kind To answer one question I have on my mind? “Where can I find the special cat I'm looking for? I've seen it only once before.”

“Are you talking about Pogeyan?” he said. Uncle Sandy wasn't sure what he meant. “The cat that comes and goes as the mist, Are you referring to that elusive cat that exists?” “Yes Sir, that's the one,” Uncle Sandy affirmed. He was so happy he could've drummed and hummed. “Aha!” said the tribesman, pointing to the mountains higher up,“I've seen the cat over there, all of three times in close-up.”

Uncle Sandy was feeling extremely blessed. He did a somersault that left the tribesman perplexed. Uncle Sandy was whistling to himself, and climbing When he saw two male Nilgiri Tahrs head-butting. Looking at how well they'd adapted to the terrain, Uncle Sandy wished he too was born on the mountains.

Sure he'd find his cat somewhere around here, Uncle Sandy decided to put camera traps all over. Then he slept a good night's sleep Under an open twinkling sky, on a hillock steep. When he woke up, he ran to his camera traps and checked. Yes, yes, yes, there were images of his cat!! The cat in the ghat!

The cat looked the same as it did ten years ago, Uncle Sandy was happy, ho, ho, ho! That's when he felt a tiny snake crawling over his feet. He was startled, and realised he'd been dreaming in his sleep. Uncle Sandy prayed his dream would come trueHope he finds his grey cat soon, don't you?

The Cat in the Ghat is a whimsical tale of Uncle Sandy going in search of a mysterious cat in the Western Ghats. It has been inspired by the real-life expedition by Sandesh Kadur, a National Geographic Emerging Explorer, wildlife filmmaker and conservation photographer. His goal is to inspire people to protect and appreciate what remains of our wilderness. He is still looking for the Pogeyan!


# Katitu Momambo, the clever little girl

Once upon a time there lived three girls in a desert village in the Kalahari. Katitu Momambo was the youngest of the three. She was small but clever and wise. The three big girls went into the veld one day to gather food and wood. Little Katitu ran after them, but the sisters sent her back. "Go back Katitu! You are too small to go with us! Stay at home!" they said. Katitu did not pay attention to them. She followed them from a distance.

When they noticed her, they were too far away from home to send her back, so she joined them. While she was walking behind them, Katitu cut herself some wood. She made herself a bow and many arrows. The girls walked and walked and walked until the sun dropped into the Kalahari horizon. They were lost. They walked into a deserted village and found a hut in which to spend the night.

An old woman was sitting next to the hut. Little Katitu went and greeted her. "Oh?" answered the old woman, "This is the village of the Big Snake! He stays in a big hole in the cattle kraal. When people come to milk the cows, he eats them! He will go to your hut at night when you sleep and kill you there!"

Wise little Katitu did not panic. She asked the old woman for a hard cow skin to cover the door of their sleeping hut. Then Katitu wanted to sleep a little, so that she could stay awake throughout the night. "When the wind begins to blow," she said to her sisters, "you must wake me up." The wind came up, the sisters awoke Katitu and went to sleep. Katitu fixed the hard cow skin against the door of the hut and made a little hole in the middle for her bow and arrows. Katitu heard the Big Snake approach.

"Hai, gom-gom, hai, gom-gom, where are they?" sang the Big Snake. The little clever girl answered him with a chant, "Here they are, here they are!" Then the Big Snake rushed against the hard skin at the door of the hut. Little Katitu shot an arrow through the hole in the skin. Yes, the little girl killed the Big Snake.

Then Katitu woke up the older girls. "Sister, sister, sister," she whispered, "get up, get up, get up!"

And when the girls woke up they saw a big snake lying there. "Come, we have to take him back to his hole!" shouted Katitu. They rolled him up, rolled him up, rolled him up and they set him right back in his hole. "Hurry! We have to run!" And the girls ran and ran and ran.

The next morning, the Big Snake's wife told his children to go and look for him. When his children found him lying dead in his hole, they screamed: "Father is dead! Quick, let us go after those girls!" All the snake's children went after the girls. Katitu told her sisters to turn into trees. When the snakes arrived at the spot where they had seen the girls, only trees were standing there. The snakes were tired and lay under the trees to sleep. When they were asleep, the girls turned back into human beings and ran on.

The girls continued to run and were very tired and thirsty. Eventually, they saw a waterhole! None of older sisters wanted to scoop the water from the deep well. They asked Katitu to climb in as she was the smallest. "Will you help me out of the well if I climb into it?" asked Katitu. "Yes," they replied, "we will help you." Katitu went into the well and scooped water for her sisters.

Each girl drank and then walked away. They all left Katitu in the deep well and walked home. Later that evening, the elephants came to drink. One of them drank and left. Another one drank and left. The last elephant drank and swallowed Katitu with the water! A few drops of Katitu's blood sprayed onto the reeds growing at the water hole.

Meanwhile, Katitu's sisters had arrived home without any food or wood. They were crying and told the family that Katitu was lost. Everyone started searching for her. Katitu's little brother and his friend were searching too. They became very tired and rested next to a waterhole. They cut some reeds to make themselves flutes. When Katitu's brother played on his flute, the flute sang by itself: "Is this my brother who plays me, who plays me, The other girls left me, left me and the elephant swallowed me, swallowed me!" The boy rushed home and handed the reed to his father, who played it. And again, the reed sang: "Is this my father who plays me, plays me? The other girls left me, left me, and the elephant swallowed me, swallowed me!" The father handed the reed to Katitu's mother, who played it. And again, the reed sang: "Is this my mother who plays me, plays me? The other girls left me, left me, and the elephant swallowed me, swallowed me!"

Katitu's father called the young men of the homestead and ordered them to find the tracks of the elephants and find Katitu. The young men hurried off. They met the first group of elephants and asked them, "Elephants, elephants, have you seen the one who swallowed our girl?" And the elephants sang: "!a plaf! !a plaf! We trot lightly. We are so light, we carry nothing!" And they passed on.

The young men met up with an old elephant in the bush and asked, "Old elephant, elephant, have you seen the one who swallowed our girl?"

The old elephant sang: "!a plaf! !a plaf! I trot lightly! I am so light, I carry nothing!" But now the young men heard a little voice in the belly of the elephant. "Cut him open! Go on, cut him on his left side, for I am sitting on his left side!" said the voice.

They held the old elephant down and cut open his belly. There was little Katitu lying inside! The young men took her out and carried her home. Katitu was welcomed as a hero by the villagers. And that is the tale of Katitu Mamombo. The wise little girl who saved her sisters from the Big Snake, saved them from the snake's children, and (with the help of her brother) saved herself from the belly of the elephant. Of course, her sisters were punished.

Story notes Ju|'hoan storyteller, Nxisae Magdaline Nxao, told a short version of this story in Dkar, Botswana, in 2005 (Winberg 2009). In 1993, Sigrid Schmidt recorded another version from Paulina Oxoros in northern Namibia (Schmidt 2007: 59). This particular version was retold by Marlene Winberg in 2013 for the Cave to Cave European Union storytelling project in Spain, based on Nxao and Schmidt's recording. The 'clever little girl' belongs to a well-known story type where a vulnerable young girl (or young boy), saves the lives of others, by engaging her wit and the power of words, rather than supernatural means to solve problems. The illustrations in this story are from story boards by Marlene Winberg, interpreted digitally by Satsiri Winberg through manipulations of the Manyeka Art Collection of paintings made by San artists.


# Raza Meets the King

It was a very special day and so Raza was wearing his best clothes. Today, he was going to meet someone very important – His Majesty Jalaluddin Akbar, the great Mughal king! Raza's father Rahmat Khan was an important man too. He was the royal tailor to the king, and he stitched all his angarakhas – the loose coats that the king wore over his tight churidar pyjamas. This morning they were going to the palace in Fatehpur Sikri with the angarakhas the king had ordered for summer. The king was very fussy about his clothes and it was very hard to please him. Rahmat Khan had worked hard to make the angarakhas – cutting and stitching late into the night. Raza had helped too – putting in tiny stitches using the finest needle and the best silken thread. The spring sun shone brightly, the flowers smiled, and the pigeons cooed happily as the two of them walked to the fortress of Fatehpur Sikri. Two soldiers holding spears stood guarding the gate. “I'm Rahmat Khan,” Raza's father said, “I'm the angarakha maker to His Majesty and I've brought new sets for him.” “Is His Majesty expecting you?” the guard with big moustaches asked. “Ji huzoor. He chose the designs himself.” “Wait here,” the guard turned to go inside, “I'll call the Royal Steward.”

After a while the guard returned with another man. Rahmat bowed to him. “I've brought the summer clothes, Dhaniji,” he said. “Good! Come with me. His Majesty is still in his sleeping chamber. He'll see you before he leaves for the royal court.” As they walked in, Raza whispered, “Who is he, Abbu?” “Dhani Singh. He works in the Khwabgah.” “Khwabgah?” “The king's personal palace, where he has his sitting room and bedroom.” It was a long walk. Raza looked around, his eyes wide with wonder. The Mughal palaces were so beautiful! All made of red sandstone with slim carved pillars and curving arches. In between were gardens filled with flowers, lily pools and sparkling fountains. Raza thought he was in heaven. As they waited at the door of the king's bedroom, Raza studied Dhani Singh. Being a tailor's son, he noticed the clothes first. Dhani Singh was wearing a cotton angarakha in a red and white flowery print over white churidars. His nagra shoes had pointed toes that curved inward. He had tied a narrow cloth belt, a patka, at his waist. What Raza liked most was his bright red turban, printed with a design in white and yellow squares and dots.

“Your turban is very nice, Dhaniji,” he said, “that's a really pretty design!” “Thank you! I come from the land of the Rajputs and... this design, called bandhani, is from my homeland.” As they entered the room, Raza's heart was thudding. Sunlight poured in through the arched doorways, lighting up the thick silken Persian carpet woven in jewelled colours. The room was furnished with a beautifully carved bed and exquisite chairs. There were silk and gold cushions on the low bed. Even the curtains were made of silk! Raza bowed and then looked at his king. Akbar was choosing jewellery from a box held before him by a servant. He was not very tall but he had the broad shoulders of a sword-fighter. He had large, slightly slanted eyes, a drooping moustache, and a small mole above his lips. Hearing them enter, Akbar turned and smiled, “Ah Rahmat! You've brought the angarakhas? And who is this boy with you?” “My son Raza, huzoor.” “And can you stitch too, Raza?” “I'm learning, huzoor,” Raza replied nervously, “but I still make mistakes in cutting the cloth.” “You'll learn. Your father will teach you,” Akbar said gently. Rahmat opened the bundle and laid out the angarakhas on the bed.

They were made of the finest muslin and covered with delicate embroidery. All of them were in light summery colours – cream, lemon, pale blue, green and a sparkling white. Raza knew the king's favourite colour was white. Rahmat helped Akbar put on a white angarakha. Then Dhani Singh brought a large mirror and held it before the king. “I like the embroidery... and it fits well too,” Akbar said, looking pleased. “Now tie a patka. Let's see how it looks.” Rahmat took out a handful of belts and tied a light blue one around Akbar's waist, letting the fringed ends hang in front. “No...” said Akbar moodily, “this is too pale... I want something brighter.” Raza and his father then tried one patka after another – green and yellow, orange and purple, but nothing pleased Akbar. “I don't like any of the colours, Rahmat!” Akbar said, frowning impatiently. Raza saw that his father was beginning to look worried. Oh no! If His Majesty did not like the patkas, would he send all the clothes back? “I have to do something fast!” Raza thought. He looked around and said suddenly, “Huzoor, would you like to try a bright red one with a white and yellow design?” “What kind of red?” Akbar boomed. “Show me!” Raza pointed to Dhani Singh's turban, “That red?” “Hmmm...” Akbar stared thoughtfully at Dhani Singh's moustached face and said, “Let me give it a try.”

In a flash, Raza had taken off Dhani Singh's turban, unrolled it and tied it around Akbar's waist. He waited with bated breath while Akbar studied his reflection in the mirror. He noticed Dhani Singh grinning widely – he must have been amused to see the king wearing his turban as a belt! “I like the colour... and a new design too!” Akbar said finally. “Bandhani, huzoor... from the land of the Rajputs,” said Raza promptly. “Aha! Rajput like my queen, Jodh Bai!” Akbar began to smile. “Dhani, pay Rahmat for the angarakhas and patkas. I'll take them all!” “Huzoor,” asked Raza cautiously, “Dhaniji needs a turban. We've taken the one he was wearing.” “Give him a patka!” laughed Akbar. “That boring pale blue one. I am keeping his turban.”

FUN FACTS OF HISTORY 1. Raza lived during the reign of King Akbar over 400 years ago. Akbar was the greatest king of the Mughal dynasty. He was also a famous warrior. He loved wearing clothes with new designs. He also enjoyed flying kites and eating mangoes! 2. Babur, the founder of the Mughal dynasty, was the king of Kabul. He invaded India in 1526 and defeated the Sultan of Delhi, Ibrahim Lodi, at the Battle of Panipat. Akbar was Babur's grandson. He was an equally successful general and never lost a battle during his 49-year rule. 3. Two Mughal kings built new cities. Akbar built Fatehpur Sikri near Agra and Shahjahan built Shahjahanabad in Delhi. Fatehpur Sikri lies empty today but Shahjahanabad (present-day Old Delhi) is full of life and people.

4. Shahjahan's famous Peacock Throne was a square flat seat, with slim pillars at each corner covered with precious jewels. The seat had a canopy, which had the figure of a peacock studded with gems on top of it. The emperor sat under the canopy, leaning against silk cushions. 5. Many Mughal princesses were highly educated. Gulbadan Begum wrote the biography of her father, Babur. Shahjahan's daughter Jahanara was a poet. 6. The Mughal fort had many kitchens. Each kitchen sent food for the king. So when he sat down to eat, he would have as many as thirty dishes to choose from! Lip-smacking Mughlai cusine, which includes yummy dishes like biryani, pulao, kalia and korma, originated in these kitchens.


# Three for Free - A Folktale from Taiwan

In Kaohsiung in southern Taiwan, there is a mountain called Ban Pin Shan, meaning ‘one half'. Strange name for an ordinary mountain, you might think. But take one look at it and you will see why it is called so. It looks like one half of the mountain is missing! Almost as if someone has cut off the top neatly, with a big sword. Before you start to wonder how it got its name, let me tell you the legend behind it. Long, long ago, when Ban Pin Shan was still a whole mountain, there used to be a village near it. One day, a very old man came to the village carrying a huge pot on his head. His hair was white as snow, and so was his beard. His face was wrinkled like the old, worn-out clothes he wore. He set the pot down in the village square and opened the lid.

The sweet smell of fresh dumplings filled the air. “Hot dumplings! Fresh, hot dumplings!” he yelled. “One for one cent, two for two cents and three, for FREE!” Villagers passing by became curious and crowded around this foolish man who was giving away dumplings that looked inviting and smelt absolutely delicious. “One for one cent, two for two cents and three, for FREE!” yelled the old man again. “Red beans and sesame, and three for free.” The villagers who had gathered around the old man began whispering to each other. “Must be a trick! Three dumplings for free? How can that be?” they said. “The most delicious ones, Sir,” said the old man as he handed the first one to Big-Head Wang. It was as big as an egg. Big-Head Wang popped it into his mouth and went mmmm.... Everyone could see that he was really enjoying the dumpling. By the time he finished the second one, his stomach was full. But he looked at the old man and said, “If I eat the third one, I don't have to pay. It is not a lie, right?” He wanted to make sure the old man had meant what he said. “Three for free and that it will be!” said the old man, handing Big-Head Wang the third dumpling, which he promptly stuffed into his mouth. If he could eat it, he wouldn't have to pay anything.

The old man kept his word and Big-Head Wang went away happy, his stomach full to bursting. Soon, everyone wanted three dumplings each. Not a single villager ordered one or two dumplings; everyone wanted only three for free. In a while, the whole pot was wiped clean. Some of the villagers were disappointed as the old man prepared to leave. “My, my, don't all of you have good appetites,” the old man said as he heaved the empty pot over his head and walked away. Suddenly, Eagle-Eye Chan, who had just gulped down three free dumplings, cried out, “Look! A part of the mountain is missing!” “Nonsense!” said the villagers. “Too many dumplings in your tummy have made you think funny!” All of them laughed at Eagle-Eye Chan, who kept staring at the mountain long after the villagers had left. That evening, everyone was talking about the old man and his delicious dumplings. “He must be a really stupid man to give away three for free!” they said, laughing. “Let's hope he comes every day.” The next morning, the old man arrived again, carrying his pot of dumplings. He set the pot down again in the village square. “One for one cent, two for two cents and three, for FREE!” he yelled. “Peanuts and sesame, and three for free.” This time, the pot was emptied an hour earlier than the previous day. The villagers had eaten up all the dumplings, three apiece. And for free. Quietly, the old man heaved the pot over his head and left, smiling a strange smile. On the third day, the old man came again. This time, the villagers were waiting for the stupid old man to arrive. Soon, they were trying to eat as many dumplings as possible, for free. Suddenly, a voice said, “Mister, can I have one dumpling, please?” Everyone froze! Their mouths hung open with bits of dumpling falling out, as they tried to catch sight of whoever had uttered the words.

Now, which idiot would want to pay for ONE dumpling when he could have THREE for FREE? There was pin-drop silence. They saw a young man with a soft face standing in the middle of the crowd, a single cent in his outstretched hand. The old man spoke. “Young man, didn't you hear me?” he said. “One for one cent, two for two cents and three, for FREE!” “Yes, I did,” said the young man in a sincere voice. “But I've seen how you've carried this huge pot every day, giving away your dumplings, three for free. You have not made any money in the last few days and I feel sorry for you. I want to help, but I have only enough money to pay for one dumpling.” When the villagers heard the young man, their hearts were filled with shame. They hung their heads in silence. The old man stepped towards the young man and embraced him. “Ha! At last I've found you!” he cried. “I am the mountain god and I choose you to be my pupil. I will teach you all the magic that I know,” he said, as tears flowed down his old, wrinkled face. The villagers quickly realized that the mountain god had disguised himself as this old man to test them. And to find a kind-hearted soul who could become his pupil. Then, the mountain god revealed to the utter shock of everyone present that the dumplings they had been eating weren't real dumplings. They were made from the mud that he had dug out from the mountain.

As soon as the villagers heard this, they ran to see the leftover dumplings in the pot. But all they saw was a pot full of mud! And when they turned to look at the mountain, they couldn't believe their eyes! There was only half of it left standing! Just as Eagle-Eye Chan had said. But they had been too greedy to listen.... Soon, the mountain god took his young disciple with him to the mountain to teach him the magic of the gods. As for the villagers, their hearts were filled with remorse and they cursed themselves for being so greedy. They named the mountain Ban Pin Sghan – a name that stands to this day – and vowed to be less greedy. Now tell me, if an old man came to your town selling delicious dumplings, “One for one cent, two for two cents and three, for FREE!” – how many would you buy?

PAPER PIZZAZZ! Did you notice the lovely hats that the characters in the story are wearing? These traditional hats are worn by farmers while working in the fields to protect themselves from the sun. Would you like to have one for your self? Then here's one you can make easily. YOU NEED: A. sheet of chart paper (about the size of a newspaper), B. Scissors, C. Glue, D. Two pieces of string

HOW TO MAKE THE PAPER HAT: 1. Cut out a large circle from the chart paper. 2. Draw a ‘V' on the circle as shown. Cut it out. 3. Overlap the cut edge (marked ‘A') over the other (marked ‘B') as shown. Stick them together. You will now have a conical hat. 4. Make two holes in the hat and tie the strings to them as shown. 5. There! Your hat is now ready to protect you from the sun! Decorate your hat with fancy designs.
