# The Horrible Crocobots

Hi I'm D-56. I was a Techdroid at that factory over there. Part of my job was to inspect the solar-panel array that powers the factory. One day, I found that a whole bunch of them had been knocked down, and nearly destroyed, by a couple of Crocobots, who were lying lazily in the middle of the array like they owned the place! I'm Crunk. My friends and me were having a peaceful nap on that riverbank after a busy night of scavenging up and down the river for junk parts. Suddenly this crazy factory droid started shouting and screaming at us! We thought the little fellow was really funny and burst out laughing. This made him really mad and he started tossing rocks at us!

I threw one tiny pebble at them and they jumped up and started chasing me! I tried to get away but they were too fast, and caught hold of me in no time. I was terrified and pleaded with them to let me go. They said they wouldn't recycle me if I gave them our service-droid to do some maintenance work on their king but if not, they would recycle me for throwing stones at them! He promised to give our king his Service-Droid if we let him go, so, we let him go with a warning that if he didn't keep his promise, we would dismantle him and recycle his parts.

I am called Slinky I am the central computer at this factory. D-56 told me that he had been forced to agree to give our factory's one and only Service-Droid to some crocobot king! Who were these crocobots? I looked them up in my data banks... They appeared to be standard bots. Why did they need our service droid! She wouldn't be able to repair them without the right spares or tools. Then it occurred to me that they probably wanted to tear her to bits and take what parts they could use! How horrible! I would not allow it! I refused to send her off to these horrible crocobots.

Slinky convinced us to forget about the crocobots and continue with our factory work but, a few days later sector-III was completely destroyed in a fire! My name is Z3R0 my friends call me ZERO. After yesterday's disaster, Slinky sent me to sector-5, but this time that sector had to be closed down because a highly infectious virus had infected its systems. Slinky decided that the crocobots must be behind all this, because, I hadn't been given to them!

Slinky made me go meet the crocobots and ask them if we could give them 30 brand new battery-packs instead of our precious Zero . They refused, and warned me that unless we kept our side of the agreement, they would cause even worse problems!

The next day that service droid of theirs fell down and smashed her right tool array! We had nothing to do with it, but their computer thought that it was our doing! She sent that fellow D56 to tell us that they did not want any more problems and were finally ready to hand over their service-droid. Ha! Ha! We didn't have anything to do with it! We did set fire to a section of their factory, and one of us did sneak in and plant a computer virus, but we didn't do any thing to the service droid! Looks like it was just our good luck that it happened!

Slinky and D56 had just helped my fix myself when a couple of crocobots came to the factory with boxes of tools and machine parts to retrofit onto me. They behaved with the utmost politeness and carried out all their modification procedures with surprising precision.

After the modifications were done, they started off towards the river. I went along to keep Zero company for as long as I was allowed. When we reached the river one of them gave me a small tin box and said that if I ever wanted to see Zero again I should use what was in it. Then they all jumped in dragging poor zero along with them.

It had been 3 months since we lost our service droid and I was missing her a lot. D56 showed me the box the crocobots had given him, inside was some kind of chip that seemed to be made for plugging into one of his slots. After we plugged it in he jumped up and said that he knew where to find Zero and was off at top speed towards the river! With the factory's telescopic camera's I saw him jump into the water! I thought that this would be the end of him, that chip must have had some horrible virus from those horrible crocobots! It must have driven him mad!

Finally, after almost 3 days, D56 returned to the factory. Surprisingly he didn't have a speck of rust on him in fact he was actually shinier than usual, reminded me of when Zero used to be around, everything used to be spotless and clean. He was all excited about something and begged me to get into my mobile unit and go with him into the river! Seemed to me that his circuits had been damaged by river the water.

It took a while but eventually I convinced slinky to come with me to the river, I had to tell her that I had found another factory close to ours that had some new systems that she should look at. She started to get into her mobile unit and while she wasn't looking I plugged in a chip that I had with me. As soon as I got into my mobile unit I suddenly felt this urge to go somewhere and D56 seemed to know where I wanted to go. We jumped into the river and I found that I wasn't getting wet because there was an energy shield protecting me! I ran a system check, and found a chip that was a lot like the one the crocobots had given to D56! It was telling me where to go and seemed to point me in the same direction that D56 was taking me. So I went along.

The chips generated energy shields around our bodies that kept the water out! As soon as we landed on the riverbed we started in the direction the chips told us to go and soon we were in the ocean that the river flowed into. I couldn't wait to show slinky what I had found! After a few more minutes we reached a magnificent underwater structure, with transparent domes, and shining, glittering plasteel walls. Next to it were a group of huge hydro-fans in the middle of a garden of energy cells .

When we reached the airlock, Slinky asked me what this factory was doing at the bottom of the ocean? I laughed and told her that it wasn't a factory it was a city, and it belonged to the crocobots! Wow! Such a big city! Poor Zero must have so much work to do! These horrible crocobots must be forcing her to work day and night!

Suddenly I saw a group of huge amphibious droids swimming down towards us. For their size they seemed to move surprisingly fast. As they got closer I saw that they were not moving on the ocean floor like we where. They were swimming! They were swimming fast! I thought they must be some kind of amphibious droid troopers because they were swimming in formation with the leader in front!

When they reached us at the airlock, they stopped and landed in front of us. I rushed forward and cried, ”O general! Help me! I'm a poor Factory computer whose Service-droid, was carried off by the dreadful King of the Crocobots!”

It had been a busy day and I had just finished teaching some of the crocobots how to fix a power pack when there was a beep from the airlock telling me that the king and his survey team had returned and were standing outside. I went and opened the airlock.

Suddenly the airlock opened and out stepped Zero! I was overjoyed to see her and told her that I had just asked these fine droid troopers to help release her from the clutches of the terrible crocobots. They all started laughing! D56, Zero and the troopers! Suddenly the leader of the droid troopers made a strange beeping sound and started shifting and adjusting his armor plates, . . .

. . . and then he turned into a crocobot! “I am the king of the crocobots!” I said to the factory computer. “Your service-droid is a good, efficient droid, and you will find that we have been kind to her.” I then explained to her that after years of haphazard retrofitting and other modifications; using old droid parts; we crocobots were now mostly droid and only became crocobots when we walked on land, but in water we changed into our droid selves and lived in this underwater city of croco-droids!

D56 and Slinky moved into the underwater city with the croco-bot-droids and Zero, and they all lived happily ever after. THE END.


# Inside the World Wide Web

Have you heard of the World Wide Web? No? Never mind. Now, have you heard of the Internet? Yes? Great! But what IS the Internet? Did you say “I am not quite sure, but I know it has something to do with computers”? You're right – it does. But that's not the whole answer. What's the WHOLE answer then? Hmmm. We need an EXPERT to answer that. And guess what - I know JUST the person! She's usually to be found near a computer, so let's go straight to the computer now.

Hi Nettikutti! Here is a group of kids to meet you! Come on out, come on out, wherever you are! THERE you are! Go on, kids, say hello! And don't be fooled by her cuteness and her size – she holds a LOT of information in her little head!

So Nettikutti, here's what everyone wants to know - What IS the Internet? Ooooh. BIG question. Let's see how I can put it simply. The Internet (short for ‘INTERconnected NETworks') is a large, large, LARGE collection of computers from all over the world that are connected to each other.

The computers could be gigantic computers (the kind research laboratories or governments own), desktop computers (the kind you see in banks and computer centres), laptops (the kind people sling across their shoulders and carry with them), cellphones (the kind that ring so loudly and annoyingly in movie halls), and even the little music players with the itty-bitty headphones that seem to grow out of people's ears.

All these computers are connected with each other either by real wires and cables - cables that run above the ground, underground, even under the sea (big computers) - OR by wireless signals (laptops, cellphones, music players). So you see, you don't have to be sitting in one place and have your computer plugged into an electric socket to be on the Internet – you can even be connected to the world while you are on the move!

That's it? We thought the Internet was about talking to friends and downloading film songs and booking movie tickets and looking for information for school projects and finding the telephone number of a hospital! But that's not the Internet. All THAT is part of something truly magical, something called... wait for it.... the World Wide Web! This World Wide Web - let's call it W3 for short – is a large, large, LARGE collection of what are called PAGES (there are some 40 BILLION public pages on the W3 now!).

A page could contain information in the form of words, numbers, photographs, songs, video clips, and more. This collection of pages (or the W3) ‘sits' on the Internet, in those millions of computers and cell phones and music players. The Internet is a network of networks made up of computers, laptops, tablets and mobile phones. W3 is a collection of connected pages, that is on the Internet. So the W3 is NOT the Internet itself, but one PART of it, the coolest part. If you think of the Internet as a restaurant, then the W3 is the most popular dish on the menu. And the spoon that helps you dig into this dish and get to your favourite bits of it is called a ‘Web Browser'.

Oooooh! Now you've made us hungry, Nettikutti! But do tell us more about what makes the W3 so popular. Sure! The W3 is super-exciting because it includes: Email – which allows you to send letters to anyone anywhere in the world – and have them receive it in under a minute! The same letter – if you were sending it to someone in America, say, would have taken 15 days to reach him if you had mailed it through a post office. And it would have cost you a lot of money too. But email is free!

Search – which helps you find useful – and useless! – information on a million different subjects. You may want to know which states the River Ganga flows through, or see what the Statue of Liberty looks like. You may want to hear the latest film song of your favourite actor, or watch an episode of a serial that you missed. You may want to find out the score in the T20 World Cup, or see if there are tickets available on the Mumbai-Pune train tomorrow. If someone whose computer is connected to the Internet, somewhere in the world, has decided to share this information with the world and put it on the W3, you will be able to find it - instantly! And for free!

But Nettikutti, HOW do you find the page that you want, out of all those billions of pages? Easy! Each page also has a unique ‘address' which helps your Web Browser find it, just like your home address helps the postman to find your house. So if you know the page's address, you can go to it immediately. What if you don't know the page's address? No problem! You can use a wonderful service called a ‘Search Engine', which also sits on the W3, to help you.

Sharing – which helps you share ANYTHING you want – a song you love, your dog's picture, a clever way to solve a difficult maths problem, your big idea for keeping our streets free of litter – with everyone in the world! No single person owns the Internet or the W3, and no government has authority over it*, so you don't need to ask ANYONE for permission before you share. Think about how cool that is! Until now, you had books and movies and television and newspapers giving you information, ‘talking' to you, but YOU couldn't talk back to THEM. With the W3, everything has changed – you can listen, and YOU CAN HAVE YOUR SAY too. And you don't have to be an important person or a grown-up to do this. THIS is what makes the W3 so fantastic – it is a truly free and open AND democratic system – it gives EVERYONE who is connected to the Internet a VOICE. *Governments do 'control' the internet in their own countries, however. Governments can even 'switch off' the internet, so that their citizens cannot access it, and some have actually done so for short or long periods.

Wow! That's great, Nettikutti! Now, on a completely different tack – we understand why the first two Ws in W3 stand for World Wide, but why is it called a Web? Isn't it the INTERNET that is actually a web? Good question! You're right about the Internet being a web (because of all those computers being connected to each other), but SO IS THE W3. Let me explain. Remember those billions of pages that the W3 is made of? THEY are all connected, or ‘hyperlinked', to each other as well! That means you can go from one page to another almost endlessly! Do you see now how the W3 is ALSO a web, a HU-MUN-GOUS web of knowledge and information and entertainment for all humankind to enjoy and use?

We do, we do! Now we have to have to have to know - who was the superbrain who came up with such a wonderful idea? I thought you'd never ask! For the answer to that question, we have to go back in time some 20 years, to a nuclear research laboratory called CERN in Switzerland. Many scientists there, and across other labs in Europe, were working on projects together, but there was no way to share their work with each other quickly and easily. They would have to actually travel to each others' labs, or use the post office and courier services, to let their teams know how far they had progressed.

One of the scientists at CERN, Tim Berners-Lee, was getting a little fed up of this, so he decided to figure out a way to share information better and faster. He came up with a big idea called ‘hypertext' – a way of linking information on computers together – to do this. The idea worked really well for CERN, and everyone was really happy. And THEN - Tim Berners-Lee had his SECOND big idea.

He felt his invention would benefit other people as well, and that it would be selfish to limit it to CERN. He talked to the authorities at CERN, and persuaded them to let him share the idea of hypertext with other scientists all over the world, for free. They agreed! Berners-Lee shared his idea, and urged everyone he shared it with to improve it or add to it as they wished. The idea of being able to access and share information from anywhere on earth instantly was SO powerful and SO attractive that a LOT of people began to use hypertext. Since anyone could use their own ideas to make it better, people all over the world felt they 'owned' the internet, that it was THEIRS. Which was a wonderful thing.

By 1993, the W3 had EXPLODED, with millions of people beginning to use it. Today, more than TWO BILLION people use the W3 in some way – that is almost one-third of all the human beings on the planet! Hmmmm. Life would be very different today if Tim Berners-Lee had decided not to be so generous, right? Absolutely! So don't you think we should cheer both him and the W3 with a big Hip, Hip Hurray? We should! We should, Nettikutti! Here we go. To Berners-Lee and the W3 - Hip Hip... ... HURRAYYYYYY!


# Dum Dum-a-Dum Biryani!

Basha and his sister Sainabi live in Hyderabad with their parents. Basha loves food. What he loves more is to cook food. He helps his Ammi in the kitchen everyday. He likes to watch her hands as they chop the brightly-coloured vegetables - plump red tomatoes, crisp green capsicums, firm orange carrots, fleshy pink onions... “Mmmm!” Basha loves the tempting aromas that swirl around Ammi's kitchen as the dhals, rice, vegetables, meat, and spices change colour on the stove. He hopes that Ammi will give him a chance to cook a dish on his own someday.

One day, Basha and Sainabi come back from school to find Ammi asleep with high fever. Baba is not yet back from his office. Ammi's mobile rings. Basha sees that Ammi's best friend Saira aunty is calling and answers it quickly. He does not want to wake Ammi up. “I'm on my way back home from a wedding with lots of friends,” Saira aunty explains. She sounds exhausted. “We will be passing by your home in about two hours' time. Do you think we can have dinner at your place? There are 24 of us - and 4 are vegetarian." Basha knows that Ammi would love to see them. He and Sainabi are very fond of Saira aunty too. “You are most welcome," Basha says.

He feels excited as he hangs up the phone. This is his chance to cook a dish on his own! But will he be able to do it? He feels nervous. He opens the fridge and sees many of his favourite vegetables - cauliflower, peas, beans. He can also see a bunch of fresh mint leaves peeking out from under the carrots. "Yes!" he thinks to himself. "I have everything I need for a yummy Vegetable Dum Biryani!" Basha has watched Ammi cook Vegetable Dum Biryani many times for their family of 4. But he now has to cook for 24 people! That is six times* the number of people Ammi usually cooks it for! *(4+4+4+4+4+4 = 24. Or, 4x6 = 24) "That means," thinks Basha to himself, feeling a little nervous, "I have to cook the biryani six times!" Would he have enough time to do that?

As he starts to lay out six of every vessel he needs for the cooking, Sainabi appears at the kitchen door. “What are you up to?” she asks, frowning. When Basha explains to her what he is doing, she starts to laugh loudly. “Buddhu!” she teases him. “You don't need to make the dish 6 times! You just have to have to make it ONCE, but with 6 times the quantities of all the ingredients needed." Basha doesn't like to be teased by his smart little sister. Of COURSE he doesn't have to make the biryani six times! He could kick himself for his silly mistake. "I knew it all the time," he says quickly. "I just wanted to see if YOU knew it." “Of course you did, Bhai," Sainabi says soothingly, but her eyes twinkle mischievously. "So, tell me, how much rice do we need for 4 people?” “1.5 cups.” “Then you'll need 1.5 x 6 = 9 cups of rice for 24 people," Sainabi replies instantly.

Basha stares at her. How does Sainabi work out those numbers so quickly in her head? "That's right," he says gruffly, measuring out the rice into a big vessel. "Now, why don't you tell me how much we need of all the other ingredients too, and I will tell you if you are right." "Sure, Bhai!" says Sainabi, running to get a pencil and paper. She loves it when her brother involves her in something he is doing. As Basha tells her the list of ingredients needed for four people, she calculates the quantities for 24. "15 green beans for 4 people," calls out Basha. "That means... 15 x 6 = 90 green beans for 24!" says Sainabi. "3/4 cup of curd for 4 people." "That means 3/4 x 6 = 0.75 x 6 = 4.5 cups of curd for 24," says Sainabi, working it out on her paper quickly. "I hope we have that much curd in the fridge." "We do," says Basha. "Next..." Finally, they have measured out all the ingredients.

“Can you help me with the chopping too?” Basha asks, realizing that there are a lot of vegetables to be chopped. “Of course, Bhai,” grins Sainabi. Today is her lucky day! Basha first soaks the fine orange strands of saffron in milk and the rice in water. He then joins Sainabi in chopping the vegetables. Then he turns on the stove and starts roasting the spices - cinnamon, cloves, green cardamoms, black cardamoms - and all the chopped vegetables, in ghee. The familiar pleasant aromas of good food start to fill the house. Basha starts to gain confidence in himself. He can't wait to get to his favourite part now - layering and slow-cooking the half-cooked rice, spices and vegetables in a handi. As Basha sets up the handi and starts to slow-cook it on the tawa, the doorbell rings. Before he and Sainabi can get to the door, Ammi has woken up and is greeting the guests with a surprised look on her face. Her surprise turns to worry as she realizes that they're here for dinner and she hasn't cooked anything.

She follows the pleasant smells and reaches the kitchen. “Surprise!” shout Basha and Sainabi as they whip the lid off the handi. Ammi is stunned. “Basha is a great cook, Ammi. He has made biryani! I helped him make it,” Sainabi says. Basha smiles proudly at Ammi, thinking that his little sister is not so bad after all. Ammi hugs Basha and Sainabi. "Mashallah!" she smiles. "I have two really fine kids. I am so proud of you both." "Why don't you join Saira aunty and the others, Ammi?" says Basha. "Sainabi and I will serve you all." Sainabi nods eagerly. Maybe Bhai will ask her to help him with more things from now on! She can't stop smiling at the thought. “This is the best Dum Biryani we've ever had!” say Saira aunty and her friends. "I agree - 100 percent!" says Ammi, licking her fingers. Basha and Sainabi are all smiles!

Cook with Basha and Sainabi! Guess what! Basha and Sainabi's Ammi sweetly agreed to share her Dum Biryani recipe with us! Be sure there is an adult around when you try it. Ingredients (for a biryani that serves 4): - Basmati rice - 1 1/2 cups, soaked in water - Hot milk with 3 strands of saffron soaking in it - 2 tbsp* - Water - 4 cups - Ghee - 4 tbsp - Onion - 1, sliced - Shahi Jeera - 1/2 tsp** - Bay leaf - 1 - Cinnamon - 2 inch stick - Cloves - 8 - Ginger-garlic paste - 1 1/2 tbsp - Mixed vegetables (cauliflower, beans, carrots, peas) - 3 cups, chopped - Tomato - 2 small, chopped - Green chilli - 1, chopped *tbsp = tablespoon **tsp = teaspoon

- Spice powders (Garam masala - 1 tsp; Haldi powder - 1/2 tsp; Dhaniya powder - 1 tbsp) - Curd - 3/4 cup - Mint leaves - 2 tbsp, chopped - Coriander leaves - 1 tbsp, chopped - Cashews and raisins - 5 each - Green cardamom - 5 - Black cardamom - 1 - Milk - 2 tbsp - Salt - 1 1/2 tsp Start cooking! 1. Heat half the ghee in a pan and fry the onions until browny-gold. Keep aside. 2. In the same pan, heat the rest of the ghee. Fry shahi jeera, bay leaves, cinnamon and cloves in it. Add ginger garlic paste and fry for 2 minutes. 3. Add the mixed vegetables, tomato and green chilli and fry for 3 minutes. 4. Add all the spice powders. Fry well for 2 minutes. 5. Pour the curd and half the salt into the pan and mix well. Cover and cook on low flame for about 10 minutes, until the vegetables are soft but not mushy. Footnotes to go with recipe 1. A vessel with small holes at the bottom to drain water 2. A deep and wide mouth cooking vessel

6. Take the pan off the stove and add mint and coriander leaves into it. 7. In a separate pan, boil the water. Add the rest of the salt, black cardamoms and the green cardamoms. 8. Drain the soaked rice, add it to the boiling water, and cook for 8 minutes with the pan uncovered. When the rice is almost cooked, drain it through a colander* . 9. In a handi** whose size is just right to hold the biryani, begin layering. In Layer 1, put 1/3rd of the cooked vegetable mix (from step 5) and 1/3rd of the cashews and raisins. In Layer 2, put 1/3rd of the cooked rice (step 8), topped with 1/3rd of the fried onions (step 1) and 1/3rd of saffron milk. Keep alternating Layers 1 and 2 until you have six layers. 10. Cover the handi and place it on a hot tava. Cook for 5 minutes on a medium flame and another 7 minutes on a low flame. 11. Remove the handi from the stove and mix the biryani until the colours of the spices are uniformly distributed. 12. The Vegetable Dum Biryani is now ready to serve!! *Colander: A vessel with small holes at the bottom to drain water **Handi: A deep and wide-mouthed cooking vessel

Are you a food math wiz? Can you cook up a delicious biryani for 24 like Basha did? No? Never mind. Maybe you can help him calculate the quantities of various ingredients he needs, like Sainabi did. Go on, try it! 1. If Basha needs 1 onion for a biryani for 4 people, how many will he need for a biryani for 24 people? 2. If Basha needs 72 florets of cauliflower for biryani that serves 24, how many florets should he put into a biryani that serves 3? 3. If the recipe says to put in 3/4 cups of curd for a biryani for 6 people, how much curd should we put into a biryani for 48 people? 4. To make biryani for 5 people, you need 4 tbsp of ghee. If Basha puts in 32 tbsps, how many people is he cooking for? 5. A biryani that serves 8 needs 2 two-inch sticks of cinnamon. How many two-inch sticks are required for a biryani that serves 64? Once you're done calculating, check for answers in the next page. No cheating, okay?

Answers: 1. 6 onions 2. 9 florets 3. 6 cups 4. 40 people 5. 16 sticks


# The dog

They told me the big black Lab's name was Reggie, as I looked at him lying in his pen.. The shelter was clean, no-kill, and the people really friendly. I'd only been in the area for six months, but everywhere I went in the small college town, people were welcoming and open. Everyone waves when you pass them on the street. But something was still missing as I attempted to settle in to my new life here, and I thought a dog couldn't hurt. Give me someone to talk to. And I had just seen Reggie's advertisement on the local news. The shelter said they had received numerous calls right after, but they said the people who had come down to see him just didn't look like “Lab people,” whatever that meant. They must've thought I did. But at first, I thought the shelter had misjudged me in giving me Reggie and his things, which consisted of a dog pad, bag of toys almost all of which were brand new tennis balls, his dishes, and a sealed letter from his previous owner. See, Reggie and I didn't really hit it off when we got home. We struggled for two weeks (which is how long the shelter told me to give him to adjust to his new home). Maybe it was the fact that I was trying to adjust, too. Maybe we were too much alike. For some reason, his stuff (except for the tennis balls — he wouldn't go anywhere without two stuffed in his mouth) got tossed in with all of my other unpacked boxes. I guess I didn't really think he'd need all his old stuff, that I'd get him new things once he settled in. But it became pretty clear pretty soon that he wasn't going to. I tried the normal commands the shelter told me he knew, ones like “sit” and “stay” and “come” and “heel,” and he'd follow them – when he felt like it. He never really seemed to listen when I called his name — sure, he'd look in my direction after the fourth or fifth time I said it, but then he'd just go back to doing whatever. When I'd ask again, you could almost see him sigh and then grudgingly obey. This just wasn't going to work. He chewed a couple shoes and some unpacked boxes. I was a little too stern with him and he resented it, I could tell. The friction got so bad that I couldn't wait for the two weeks to be up, and when it was, I was in full-on search mode for my cell phone amid all of my unpacked stuff. I remembered leaving it on the stack of boxes for the guest room, but I also mumbled, rather cynically, that the “damn dog probably hid it on me.” Finally I found it, but before I could punch up the shelter's number, I also found his pad and other toys from the shelter...I tossed the pad in Reggie's direction and he snuffed it and wagged, some of the most enthusiasm I'd seen since bringing him home. But then I called, “Hey, Reggie, you like that? Come here and I'll give you a treat.” Instead, he sort of glanced in my direction — maybe “glared” is more accurate — and then gave a discontented sigh and flopped down .... with his back to me. Well, that's not going to do it either, I thought. And I punched the shelter phone number. But I hung up when I saw the sealed envelope. I had completely forgotten about that, too. “Okay, Reggie,” I said out loud, “let's see if your previous owner has any advice.” ____________ _________ _________ _________ To Whoever Gets My Dog: Well, I can't say that I'm happy you're reading this, a letter I told the shelter could only be opened by Reggie's new owner. I'm not even happy writing it. If you're reading this, it means I just got back from my last car ride with my Lab after dropping him off at the shelter. He knew something was different. I have packed up his pad and toys before and set them by the back door before a trip, but this time... it's like he knew something was wrong. And something is wrong...which is why I have to try to make it right. So let me tell you about my Lab in the hopes that it will help you bond with him and he with you. First, he loves tennis balls. The more the merrier. Sometimes I think he's part squirrel, the way he hordes them. He usually always has two in his mouth, and he tries to get a third in there. Hasn't done it yet. Doesn't matter where you throw them, he'll bound after it, so be careful – really don't do it by any roads. I made that mistake once, and it almost cost him dearly. Next, commands. The shelter staff probably already told you, but I'll go over them again: Reggie knows the obvious ones — “sit,” “stay,” “come,” “heel.” He knows hand signals: “back” to turn around and go back when you put your hand straight up; and “over” if you put your hand out right or left. “Shake” for shaking water off, and “paw” for a high-five. He does “down” when he feels like lying down — I bet you could work on that with him some more. He knows “ball” and “food” and “bone” and “treat” like nobody's business. Nothing opens his ears like little pieces of hot dog. I trained Reggie with small food treats. Feeding schedule: twice a day, once about seven in the morning, and again at six in the evening. Regular store-bought stuff; the shelter has the brand. He's up on his shots. Call the clinic on 9th Street and update his info with yours; they'll make sure to send you reminders for when he's due. Be forewarned: Reggie hates the vet. Good luck getting him in the car. I don't know how he knows when it's time to go to the vet, but he knows. Finally, give him some time. I've never been married, so it's only been Reggie and me for his whole life. He's gone everywhere with me, so please include him on your daily car rides if you can. He sits well in the backseat, and he doesn't bark or complain. He just loves to be around people, and me most especially. Which means that this transition is going to be hard, with him going to live with someone new. And that's why I need to share one more bit of info with you.... His name's not Reggie. I don't know what made me do it, but when I dropped him off at the shelter, I told them his name was Reggie. He's a smart dog, he'll get used to it and will respond to it, of that I have no doubt. But I just couldn't bear to give them his real name. For me to do that, it seemed so final, that handing him over to the shelter was as good as me admitting that I'd never see him again. And if I end up coming back, getting him, and tearing up this letter, it means everything's fine. But if someone else is reading it, well ... well it means that his new owner should know his real name. It'll help you bond with him. Who knows, maybe you'll even notice a change in his demeanor if he's been giving you problems. even though, frankly, I'm just writing it for my dog. I couldn't imagine if I was writing it for a wife and kids and family ... but still, Tank has been my family for the last six years, almost as long as the Army has been my family. His real name is “Tank”, because that is what I drive. Again, if you're reading this and you're from the area, maybe my name has been on the news. I told the shelter that they couldn't make “Reggie” available for adoption until they received word from my company commander. See, my parents are gone, I have no siblings, no one I could've left Tank with ... and it was my only real request of the Army upon my deployment to Iraq , that they make one phone call.. the shelter ... in the “event” ... to tell them that Tank could be put up for adoption. Luckily, my colonel is a dog guy, too, and he knew where my platoon was headed. He said he'd do it personally. And if you're reading this, then he made good on his word. Well, this letter is getting downright depressing. And now I hope and pray that you make him part of your family and that he will adjust and come to love you the same way he loved me. That unconditional love from a dog is what I take with me to Iraq as an inspiration to do something selfless, to protect innocent people from those who would do terrible things ... and to keep those terrible people from coming over here. If I have to give up Tank in order to do it, I am glad to have done so. He is my example of service and of love. I hope I honored him by my service to my country and comrades. All right, that's enough. I deploy this evening and have to drop this letter off at the shelter. I don't think I'll say another good-bye to Tank, though. I cried too much the first time. Maybe I'll peek in on him and see if he finally got that third tennis ball in his mouth. Good luck with Tank. Give him a good home, and give him an extra kiss goodnight – every night – from me.


# Together We're Strong

One harsh winter, many people in the land were sick. Ma Monikazi's cheeks burned. Sweat dripped from her body. She wanted to hold the icy grass to her face to cool down. Under her blanket she held her belly and sang to the baby inside her: "Be strong, little one. Winter's not long. Be brave, little one. Together we're strong!" Her stomach growled when the baby's powerful kicks woke her at night. She ate the leftover meat in the cooking pot, hungry for life. One bright night the moon was bigger, fatter and pinker than ever. Her breath came fast. The baby was ready. The aunties in the birthing room rubbed her back and warmed the water. When Monikazi held her beautiful daughter in her arms, she knew she was a special girl, a fighter. What a blessing! Her name is Nontsikelelo. She will be the mother of all blessings.

Nontsikelelo was beautiful and strong with crinkling black button eyes. She loved her older brother, Mcengi. He made her laugh and so the laughter spread. She loved to eat meat before she had teeth. Her favourite aunt always kept a little portion on the side of her plate for Ntsiki. Mcengi chased the chickens that scratched in the garden where Ma Monikazi grew spinach and squash to feed her family. Ntsiki ran after him as her legs grew strong. Ma Monikazi had another baby boy, Velaphi, and another, Qudalele. Finally another sister, Nomyaleko. Little Ntsiki folded napkins and washed the baby clothes. She swept the house and fed the fire. She picked up her baby brother when he cried and tickled him till he laughed. She taught them to sing: "Be strong, little one. Winter is gone. Be brave, little one. Together we're strong!"

Qingqiwe, her grandfather, raised horses. His favourite was Shishi, a glossy black mare. As soon as Ntsiki was old enough, he hoisted her on to the saddle in front of him. His strong arms reached around her. He laced the reins through her fingers. He taught her to talk softly to Shishi, to groom her with a hard bristled brush. When she stroked its glossy coat, Albertina whispered, "You are the most beautiful creature. Thank you for letting me ride on your back." Her father, Bonilizwe, came home from the mines at Christmas. Ntsiki pulled herself up onto Shishi's broad back. She rode out to meet him at the bus stop. Ntsiki sat tall and straight. Her knees held firm. She handled the reins with gentle fingers. How proud Bonilizwe was of his daughter. The biggest smile Ntsiki had ever seen covered her father's face.

On her sixth birthday she went to school. "You must choose an English name," said the Presbyterian teacher, but Ntsiki liked her own name. "Why do I need a new name?" she asked. The teacher scowled and read the names aloud: "Adah, Agnes, Albertina, Anna." What did they mean? Ntsiki liked the long name best. Al-ber-ti-na! The name had rhythm. Al-ber-ti-na! The name had bounce. Albertina was a name you didn't mess with. When her cousin married a handsome man from a nearby town, Albertina was chosen as an umkhapi. The maid of honour! Weeks before the wedding, she stitched her isikhakha, the short traditional skirt, and threaded bright beads onto her amatikiti. Her mother gave her the white flag and said, "You have a big job, my blessing." At the bend in the road Albertina waved the flag, then turned Shishi back, leading everybody from miles around to the ceremony. People would gossip if she made a mistake, but the guests lined the road. They ululated and sang. They threw down flowers for the horse and the girl.

Her mother was often sick and needed Albertina to look after the home. In her last year of primary school, Albertina was the oldest pupil in the school. She was chosen to be the head girl and wore her badge with pride. Her best friend, Betty, told her about a competition, saying, "You must apply, my clever friend." "What is the prize?" asked Albertina, growing curious. "A scholarship to high school!" said Betty. "You must apply. You'll win it, for sure." Albertina studied until the candle burned down. She practised sums. She practised spelling. She sharpened her pencils and gave her shoes an extra shine. Next morning she passed Shishi in her paddock. The horse whinnied and stamped the ground.

The test began. Albertina's fingers shook. The sums were tricky. Her mouth went dry. Her hand cramped on her pencil but she continued. "Well done, Albertina!" said her teacher at the end. The important official arrived and called the top two students to the stage. "Well done to Albertina for full marks," he said, "but you are too old. The scholarship goes to..." Albertina tried not to cry. "That's unfair," shouted Betty, hopping with fury. "That wasn't in the rules!" How would Albertina go to high school now? She dragged her feet all the way home. The teacher wrote to the newspaper about the unfair decision. Brother Joe at the Catholic Mission station read the story over his breakfast. He cracked his boiled egg with an extra flourish. He pushed the newspaper across the table to Father Bernard. He didn't like the story one bit either.

Soon enough there was a scholarship for Albertina. Mariazell near Matatiele was a long way from Xolobe, but the whole village erupted. Their home girl was off to high school. She would make them proud. They threw a party like no other. The women brewed the sorghum beer and lit the fires. They slaughtered chickens and stirred up pots of meat. Albertina smiled till her face ached. She packed her brown suitcase and polished her shoes again. Before setting off on the bus to Matatiele, she said goodbye to Shishi. Albertina brushed her coat and stroked her wiry mane. She whispered all her questions into the horse's silky ear: What if I get lost? Will I make new friends? Will I still be clever so far from home? Shishi whinnied and stamped the ground. School days started well before sunrise. The girls washed quickly in the cold water and swept the dormitories before Mass. The milky porridge was never quite enough; the stew not as tasty as Aunty's back home. But Albertina studied hard. She played netball on sunny afternoons. In her school holidays Albertina worked at the mission station. She rubbed and scrubbed against the zinc washboard. She boiled sheets in copper tubs, then wound them through the wringer. She hoed and tilled the school garden but missed her family. Who was telling her brothers and sisters funny stories? Who wiped their eyes when they cried? Who tickled them until they laughed?

Albertina loved the nuns who taught her. Could she become a holy sister? "But nuns earn no salary," said Father Bernard. "Perhaps you should become a nurse? You'll be paid while you study."

Albertina took a train to Johannesburg. She bought a smart white uniform, new navy shoes and a shiny red fountain pen. Sick people came all day to the hospital. She cleaned their wounds with careful fingers. She held the old people gently. When the babies cried, she sang: "Be strong, little one. Winter's not long. Be brave, little one. Together we're strong! Some nights Albertina worked till dawn. She looked out the window and thought of her family. Were the children hungry? Did they go to school? Who was riding Shishi? She remembered the dark green spinach. She missed the scent of the earth. There was no vegetable garden here. There was nowhere for a horse. Albertina never went to parties. She saved every shilling. On her days off she learned to play tennis. Whoosh! Plop! She whacked the ball across the net. Always, she wished for a little more money to send home.

Walter Sisulu was a brave and clever man who dreamed of freedom for South Africa. His big smile captured Albertina's eye. They walked together down the city streets. Her delicate hand rested on his arm. Walter wanted Albertina to be the mother of his children. Bright ribbons decorated the Bantu Men's Social Centre on their wedding day. Albertina's long-sleeved dress had a swirling train of lace. Many friends blessed their special day. Albertina planted flowers in her little garden. Within a year, Max was born. Albertina had become a mother. One day people would call her the mother of the nation. Max had his mother's black button eyes and his father's round chin. He was the hope for their future. Albertina wanted to fight for a new South Africa, so that Max could be free. When he cried, she sang: "Be strong, little one. Winter's not long. Be brave, little one. Together we're strong!"

Police came in the middle of the night, banging on the door. Albertina scolded the men who messed up her house. "How rude you are!" she said, "trampling mud inside my home." In the morning Albertina's favourite flowers lay crushed beneath their footprints. She remembered chasing the chickens from her vegetable garden back in Xolobe and set about replanting her garden. The earth, she knew, would recover. She would support her husband who kept many secrets and hid from the police. She joined the women and worked to organise a march to Pretoria. The women refused to carry a pass. They sang, "Wathint' abafazi; wathint' imbokodo! You strike a woman; you strike a rock!" Many hard years followed after Walter's arrest. He was jailed on Robben Island for 26 years. Albertina, also, was sent to jail many times. Often she was scared. Often she was lonely.

But even on the darkest nights, she could see a sliver of moon through the window in her cell. She sang the song that Ma Monikazi sang before she was born: "Be strong, little one. Winter's not long. Be brave, little one. Together we're strong!"


# A Helping Hand

Dear... well, you know who you are. And it's not like you're ever going to see this letter. Miss told me that I had to be your mentor and show you around because you are a new student. I didn't know what a ‘mentor' is, so I looked it up in the dictionary. Anyway, she didn't tell me anything about that. Ali and Gaurav and Sumi and Rani, they kept asking me about it when we were going home from school. I told them that I didn't know what they were talking about, but that's not true. How can I not know? See, you made me lie to my friends. Yours sincerely, Me

Hi again, Ma says that it is not good to stare at people, but I can see that everyone stares at you. They stare at me too because I have to hang around with you and be your ‘mentor'. Why did you come to our school? Why couldn't you continue going to whatever school you went to earlier? Do you know what happened yesterday? Gaurav, Ali and two of their friends from Class VII cornered me after school to ask about you-know-what. They took my bag and wouldn't give it back. Then they threw it into the thicket by the side of the road and I had to scramble down into the mountainside to get it. I tore my shirt and Ma was angry with me. This is all your fault. Me

Hello, I keep telling them that they can ask you whatever they want to know. What's the point of asking me? How am I supposed to know why you have that thing or how it works? To be really honest, I can't say I'm not curious myself or that I don't have the same questions the others are asking me. Yes, I noticed it the first day when you came into the classroom. I saw how you did everything with one hand and how your left hand never moved. At first I couldn't tell what the problem was. Then, when I came closer, I saw that something wasn't quite right. It looked weird, like it was covered in plastic or something. Then I thought it was a toy hand. It took me some time to understand. Also, I saw what happened at lunch. See you, Me

Hello, My oldest sister, the one who's studying engineering in Delhi, called today. I told her, “There's a girl in my class and she has a fake hand,” and she said that the term is “prosthetic hand”. Listen, I have some advice for you. You may be new and all, but if you want people to stop staring at you and talking about you, you have to stop standing in the corner all the time. Why don't you play with us? Why don't you come on the swing? Everyone loves the swing. It's been two weeks, and you can jolly well come by yourself. I am not going to be your minder for ever. Sometimes I don't know what to say to you. Me

Hi again, After the lunch incident that day, I've been watching you. I'm just curious. Is it weird to have one hand? Is it only your hand or is your entire arm fake, sorry, prosthetic? Today, Sumi, Gaurav and I walked to school together. They were playing a game they made up called One-Hand Challenge. The rule is, you have to do things with one hand. Like, packing your bag or buttoning your shirt.

Sumi couldn't tie her shoelaces and she forgot about it and tripped and fell. She got a cut on her chin. Miss saw it and, even though she put some antiseptic cream on it, she scolded Sumi for being careless. “You can't run around in the mountains with your shoelaces untied. What will happen if you fall while going home or something?” I think adults worry too much. Yours truly, Me

Hi, Do you know what a coincidence is? It's like when you talk about something and the same thing happens sometime later in a completely unrelated way. In my last letter, I was telling you about Sumi and the shoelaces, and then, today, I saw you tying your shoelaces. Wow, that was awesome! I think you did it faster than I can do it with two hands. If you were my friend, I would challenge you to a shoelace-tying race. Or no, maybe I would ask you to teach me how to do it with one hand. I have to confess, I did try to tie my shoelace with one hand when I got home. But it's impossible. How do you do it? Maybe I'll ask you tomorrow. Curious, Me

Hi, So, after what you said, I've tried to do a lot of things with only one hand, but it's so difficult! I still don't get how you do it, like having a bath, wearing your clothes, packing your bag. Since that day at lunch, I did realize that you have to do some things differently, but it's not like you don't do almost everything the rest of us do. Listen, I'm sorry about what I said earlier... about playing with us. I guess you were just feeling shy. And also about coming on the swing. I tried and it's hard to get your balance if you don't hold it with two hands. But you're great in the jungle gym, even if you don't hang from the bars, and you can run really fast, even faster than Ali, who won the first prize at Sports Day. Bye, Me

Hello! That movie was really funny, no? I laughed so much that my stomach hurt and it was like I was crying. I always like it when they show movies in school. It means no classes. Last time, before you came to our school, they showed this movie about a tiger cub who got lost. It was quite scary, mostly because it was a true story. Later someone found it and managed to get it back to its family. True stories like that are called documentaries, did you know that? Tiger cubs are cute, no? Last year, there was a puppy near our house. It was very cute too, but it grew up and then it wasn't so cute any more. Got to go now! Me

Hello, hello! Did you know? I was so surprised when I saw you on the bus. I had no idea my father worked in the same place as yours! But I'm so happy you came for the office picnic, because last year when they took us, there were no other children my age and I got really bored. Okay, I'm really tired, so I'm going now. See you in school tomorrow. Me

Hi, I think I should warn you, Principal Sir becomes slightly insane whenever Annual Day comes along. He might yell at you — he yells at everyone — so don't take it personally. My ma says that he's under a lot of pressure because our Annual Day performance reflects on him. I'm not sure what that means, but he does look stressed out. Did you see his hair? It was like he touched a loose wire and got an electric shock! Though I think it was very mean of Rani to put a frog in his chair. Okay, I'm going now before he catches me writing this letter! Me

Hey, Your new hand is so cool! No offence, but the old one was a bit boring. It was just... there. The new one is like magic, and you can move the fingers and grip with it! I hope you didn't mind that I asked to shake hands. I just said it before I could think. Maybe tomorrow we can do some experiments to find out if you can lift stuff with it. Oh! I just realized, the last couple of letters I wrote to you, I didn't mention your prosthetic hand at all. It's like I forgot all about it and wanted to tell you so many other things. The funny thing is, I'm not that curious about your hand any more. I don't know why. Your friend, Me

THE FRIEND-O-METER QUIZ How good are you at helping people fit in? Take our Friend-o-Meter quiz to find out! 1. Your teacher asks you to show the new student in school around. What do you feel? a. Fantastic! A new friend! b. Why can't they figure things out themselves? c. Uh oh... 2. A girl in your class walks with a limp. The others laugh at her. What do you do? a. Nothing – it's none of your business. b. Tell her to ignore them – they're mean. c. Ask your classmates to imagine if they were different.

3. Your new classmate is having trouble with his lessons. What can you do? a. Tell the brainiest student in class to lend him her notes. b. Tell the teacher – it's her job to help him. c. Ask him if you could help him with his work. 4. The new girl in class is rather shy. She doesn't play with anyone. What can you do? a. Let her be – she'll join in when she's ready. b. Call her over and make her join in the games. c. Go and sit next to her – maybe she'll start a conversation.

Get your score: Q1. a - 1; b - 2 ; c - 3 Q2. a - 2; b - 1 ; c - 3 Q3. a - 3; b - 2; c - 1 Q4. a - 2; b - 1; c - 3 Now add it up. If you've scored...

4-6 points:You are a born friend, always ready to lend a hand. You don't wait for people to ask for help – you're already there, waiting to give it to them.7-9 points:You are an independent person and feel that people should be too. But that doesn't mean you don't care – you just don't want to force anyone. 10-12 points:You might be a little shy, but you are kind-hearted too. You'll do whatever you can indirectly to help others and make them feel at ease.


# Bonda and Devi

"Again! Stack them up again, Bonda! I want to try knocking them down from a different angle!" Without hesitating for a moment, without even frowning, Bonda puts one battered box on top of the other for the fiftieth time. The high, shaky, cardboard tower is perfectly balanced, the way only Bonda knows how to build it.

I rev up my super-speedy turbo engine – vrooom, VROOM – and gun for it, coming in from the right this time. BAM! I crash through, shrieking with delight, as the tower explodes around me. Bonda laughs, clapping as loudly as he did the first time I did this. Dear Bonda. The best, most loyal friend anyone could have. Especially a 10-year-old in a wheelchair.

Hi. I'm Devi, and I'm from the year 2085 AD. My grandfather is always going on about how much the world has changed since he was my age, back in 2016. It's more crowded now, but the air, thankfully, is less polluted, because a great many vehicles now run on electricity or solar power. There are fewer accidents too, because vehicles drive themselves, and they are very careful. There are fewer trees and forests than there used to be, but more are being planted all the time, which is good. But what has REALLY changed, says my grandfather, is technology. There was technology way back in 2016 too, but nothing like what we have now. it has truly made life wonderful. Well, MY life, anyway. It was technology that gave me my best friend.

Meet Bonda. Best friend forever, cardboard-tower builder, and ROBOT. I see your eyes pop. Ha! You hadn't guessed that, had you? But think about it. Which other friend would cheerfully build you a tower 50 times over without complaining? And which other friend would build it so perfectly every single time? Bonda: I agree! Humans are simply not as accurate or as consistent as we are. And they complain that doing the same thing over and over is “boring” (I've no idea what that word means, so don't ask me!). And they fall ill, and need to go to the toilet a lot. I wonder how they got anything done before we arrived!

Building towers is not all Bonda can do, though. I can train him to do many other things – bowl me two dozen fast balls in ten minutes so that I can practise my batting, bring down my secret treasure box from the topmost shelf (which is so high that no one else can reach it without a ladder), lift Baba's heavy desk so I can see where my tiny gold earring has rolled off to (Ma would yell at me for hours if I lost it)... Things like that.

Bonda: Like I said, humans are quite useless compared to us robots. The poor things are stuck at their sad little heights, while we can grow taller and shorter at will, by extending or collapsing our arms and legs. Our eyes can be cameras, telescopes, microscopes, or all three rolled into one!

How do I train Bonda? By “programming” him. Programming means showing him, just once, how something's done. For instance, the other day, I wanted him to bring me my secret treasure box, the one I talked about earlier. Here's how I did it. First, I directed Bonda to the shelf it was sitting on, drawing the route on the plan of my house he displays on his touchscreen. “Can you reach up and scan the top shelf now, B?” I said when he got there. His arm shot out and up. As he ran his hand along the length of the shelf, the tiny camera inside his finger clicked away, taking pictures of everything there.

When he showed me those pictures, I simply touched the picture of the box I wanted. "That's my secret treasure box, Bonda," I said. "Can you bring it down for me?" Now, whenever I need the box, I only have to say, "Secret treasure box!" and off he goes, straight to the shelf. Once he has “learnt” something, Bonda never forgets. His memory is fantastic! Bonda: Fantastic? Only to incompetent humans, who can never remember where they left their keys, their glasses, their phones...

Yeah, that's what my best friend's like. And yeah, I am a very lucky girl indeed. Oh, don't get me wrong – I'm not weird. I do have human friends who I play with and fight with and go to school with. But I love Bonda more than all of them, because he doesn't sulk when I have fun with someone else, or get jealous when I beat him at maths, or mad when I forget to wish him on his birthday... Psst! And this is because... Bonda has no feelings! But don't say that out loud – it might make him feel bad.

Bonda: Tsk, tsk, Devi, where's your logical thinking, girl? You say I don't have feelings, and then you worry that I will “feel bad”. Humans can be logical, but when they "feel" sad, or mad, or scared, logic disappears! Pah! Who needs feelings? Wait! Was that a “feeling” I felt just now? My processor tells me it was. It tells me I am feeling something called “disgust”... Hmm... I don't know how to “feel” about that.

Oh, and here's the best part – I never have to feel bad that he's having fun with another friend instead of me, because... he doesn't have any! Bonda: Hey, hey, that's not true – I do have other friends! The robot waitress at the cafe always says “Hello” nicely, and so does the robot checkout boy at the grocery store... Wait a minute... I've just processed what Devi has been saying... she only likes me BECAUSE I have no other friends – AND no feelings! Not because of who I am! Oh no! I feel a rush of feels – I'm feeling mad, and sad, and...

"Bonda! Are you okay? You're overheating, Bonda – you have a fever! And your auto shut-down is not working! "But don't worry, my friend, I will take care of you like you have always taken care of me. Listen carefully now, Bonda – I'm going to shut you down now so that your system can recover, ok? Don't be scared – it will be like going to sleep, that's all. And when I start you up again, you'll be back, good as new, and we will be best friends again. Do you hear me?" Bonda: Devi's eyes are all wet, like they are when she is sad, or scared. That makes me feel a sad feel. But my processor tells me that her wet eyes mean that she really cares about me. Now I feel a happy feel... So confused... sad-and-happy... happy-and-sad... And shutting dowww...

There is a whirr and a hum as Bonda reboots. I fight back my tears. "Bonda?" I say. "Bonda, can you hear me? Do you know who I am? Please tell me your memory isn't wiped out! I want you to remember all the fun we've had this past year, all the love..."

Bonda: A-ha! Love. Was that the feel I was feeling, that happy-and-sad feel?

Bonda looks at me. "Hi Devi! What would you like me to do for you today? Shall we play Stack-the-Boxes? Shall I bring you your secret treasure box? Do you want to..." "Bonda! You're all right! Oh, I'm glad, glad, GLAD!" I throw my arms around Bonda and hug him tight.

Bonda: And then I do something really odd, something no one has ever programmed me to do. I wrap my arms around my friend Devi, for no logical reason at all.

# Robots: Yesterday, Today And Tomorrow Will there be a Bonda for every Devi by the year 2085? We'll have to wait and see, but there is no denying that robots will be far more visible even in 25 years from now, by the year 2040.

# Who Or What Is A Robot? If you said a robot is a machine that looks and acts like a human, except it moves jerkily, has a flat, expressionless voice, and eyes that flash when it is turned on, you've obviously been watching too many movies and TV shows. Because, actually, a robot is “any electro-mechanical machine guided by a computer program or electronic circuits". Yup, it doesn't have to look like a human at all. Which is why you may not have realised that there are robots all around us, already!

# Really? Where? Well, they are in factories, warehouses, orchards, hospitals and even homes. They may look like large mechanical arms, like the ones in car manufacturing plants, welding, gluing and painting car parts. Or they may look like tiny cameras, like the ones in hospitals, attached to thin hair-like tubes, entering our intestines and arteries to check them out for problems. Some robots look like flat round discs, working in homes and offices, buzzing around and cleaning floors at night when everyone is asleep. Some look like small wheeled vehicles, going into war zones, finding dangerous landmines, or rolling across the surfaces of the moon or Mars, taking pictures and collecting samples to send to scientists back on Earth.

# I Wish I Could See A Robot For Myself! If you have ever used, or even seen, a computer or a smartphone, you have 'seen' a robot! Yes, they are in those devices as well. Some of them even have names, like Siri and Cortana (have you heard of them?). They can help us find useful information - stuff for school projects, traffic reports (which roads have heavy traffic today? What is a good alternative route to take?), entertainment (where is the new Deepika Padukone movie running? And when is the next show?), and much more. They can even book our bus and train tickets, order our groceries, and tell us exactly how many calories we have burnt after a game of football.

# What Does The Future Of Robots Look Like? What Will The World Really Be Like By, Say, 2040, As Far As Robots Are Concerned? We may not have robots walking our streets in India by 2040, but we will definitely be surrounded by robots of one kind or another without knowing it. It is quite likely that there will be driverless “robot” cars on our streets. We may have microscopic robots in our contact lenses that help us take pictures – we won't even have to hold our phones or cameras up to take them (but how will we take selfies??). And little airborne robots called drones will be flying busily all around – delivering letters, packages and kababs, putting delivery boys out of business, and hopefully reducing some traffic on our streets! As for 2085, 45 years AFTER that, who knows what robots will be up to?


# The Boy and the Drum (A Shorter Version)

A poor woman had a son. She worked hard as a gardener in wealthy houses in their town. They gave her some grain in return. But she felt bad because she could never afford to buy nice clothes or lovely toys for her son. The little lad was bright and cheerful. Not having any toys or nice clothes did not bother him. After a hard day's work, the mother was going to the market to sell the grain she had received. She asked her son: Mother: What can I get for you from the market, little one? Now the boy was fascinated with the sound of a drum. So he said: Boy: A drum, mother, I would love to have a drum to play with.

The mother knew she would never have enough money to buy a drum for her son. She went to the market, sold her grain and bought some gram flour and some salt. While returning home, she felt sad that she would have to face him empty-handed. So when she saw a nice piece of wood on the road, she picked it up and brought it home. The son did not know what to do with the piece of wood. Yet he happily carried it with him when he went out to play. A happy song sprang to his lips and he went along singing it: Boy: Tum-ti-tee Tum-ti-tee-Tum-ti-tee-Tum-ti-tee- Tum-ti-tee- Tum-ti-tee Tot Tum-ti-tee Tum-ti-tee-Tum-ti-tee-Tum-ti-tee- Tum-ti-tee- Tum-ti-tee Tot! I asked for a drum and look what I got, A lovely piece of wood! I asked for a drum and look what I got, I think my luck is good! Tum-ti-tee Tum-ti-tee-Tum-ti-tee-Tum-ti-tee- Tum-ti-tee- Tum-ti-tee Tot Tum-ti-tee Tum-ti-tee-Tum-ti-tee-Tum-ti-tee- Tum-ti-tee- Tum-ti-tee Tot!

And as he went skipping along on his way, he came across an old man. The old man was trying to light his stove using some cow-dung cakes. The fire was not catching and there was smoke all around. The smoke made the man's eyes water and he was coughing. The little boy ran up to him and said: Boy: What is the matter Grandpa? Can I help you in any way? Old Man: Ah! Little one, I am trying to cook some food, but I am unable to start a fire. For you see, My fire will just not start I need to cook. Oh! Take a look My fire will never start! Can somebody start this fire? My eyes are red, my arms are tired. I need to eat, I need some food. Oh! For a dry piece of wood!

Boy: Here, Grandpa, you can use my piece of wood to start your fire. Narrator: The old man was very pleased. He lit his fire, made some bread and gave a piece to the boy. The boy skipped along singing his song: Boy: La-la-la-la- La-la-la-la- La-la-la-la- La La-la-la-la- La-la-la-la- La-la-la-la- La! My piece of wood got me some food. A lovely piece of bread. My piece of wood is not a drum, but it Got me bread. A lovely piece of bread. La-la-la-la- La-la-la-la- La-la-la-la- La La-la-la-la- La-la-la-la- La-la-la-la- La! The boy walked on till he came upon a potter's wife. She had her baby in her arms. The baby was wailing and flailing her arms. The boy said: Boy: Dear lady, why is your daughter crying? Potter's Wife: My little one is hungry. She has not had anything to eat since morning. I cannot give her anything as there is nothing in the house. I wish I had some bread to give her. The kind hearted boy gave the lady his bread. She gave the bread to her child who ate it eagerly and stopped crying. She was so pleased with the boy that she gave him a large pot.

The boy went along humming his funny song: Boy: Tum-ti-tee Tum-ti-tee-Tum-ti-tee-Tum-ti-tee- Tum-ti-tee- Tum-ti-tee Tot Tum-ti-tee Tum-ti-tee-Tum-ti-tee-Tum-ti-tee- Tum-ti-tee- Tum-ti-tee Tot! I gave my bread away and Look what I got! I gave my bread away and Got a lovely pot! Tum-ti-tee Tum-ti-tee-Tum-ti-tee-Tum-ti-tee- Tum-ti-tee- Tum-ti-tee Tot Tum-ti-tee Tum-ti-tee-Tum-ti-tee-Tum-ti-tee- Tum-ti-tee- Tum-ti-tee Tot! The little boy skipped along until he came upon a strange scene at the river bank. A washerman was quarreling loudly with his wife. The boy stopped and asked: Boy: Dear Sir, what is the matter? Why are you quarreling with your wife? Narrator: The washerman said: Washerman: You see, son, it was like this, I gave her a pot, I gave her a pot. And what did she do? I gave her a pot, it cost a lot. She went and broke it too! I gave her the pot that cost a lot. It'll cost me all the more. She broke the pot, the last of my lot, And now I feel so sore!

I gave her the pot, the pot she broke. The pot I need to boil my clothes. Without the pot, my clothes will rot. Oh, they will remain soiled! So you see, I have nothing to boil my clothes in before I wash them. And because of her, my trade will suffer. Boy: Dear Sir, don't quarrel with your wife. Please take this pot of mine and use it. The washerman was very happy with the pot. He was so pleased with the boy's good nature that he gave him a nice coat in return. The boy ran along singing his funny song. Boy: As I walked along, With my pot in hand, I met a washerman. Who gave me this coat so grand! Oh so funny indeed! People looking for things, And I have what they need!

The boy walked on, all the while admiring his grand coat. He soon came to a bridge, and there he was alarmed by what he saw. A man was shivering in the cold and he was not even wearing a shirt. He seemed to be hurt and was moaning in pain. The boy was very concerned and ran up to the man and said: Boy: You seem to be bleeding, You seem to be hurt! I'll try and get you some help. You also need a coat. The boy asked the man how he came to be in such a sorry state.

The man said: Man: I was riding my horse in a hurry. I was riding my horse to the city. A crowd of thieves, they came and GOT me! They got me down, they got me out. They took my purse, got all my money. I tried to put up a good fight. But they beat me up, they beat me bad. They left me in pain, they left me hurt. They took it all, even my shirt! The boy said: Boy: Your need is greater than mine. Please take this coat. It will help you keep warm. The man was touched by the little lad's kindness. He thanked the boy profusely and presented him with the big fine horse he was riding.

The boy was very happy and led the horse along, singing his song. Boy: Oh so funny indeed! People looking for things, And I have what they need! A man needs a shirt, But all he has is a big fine horse! I gave him my coat, what did I get? His big fine horse, of course! As he was walking along with his horse, he came upon a large party of gaily dressed people. They were part of a big wedding party with the bridegroom, and musicians. They seemed ready to go in a wedding procession, but all of them were sitting under a tree with long faces. The boy stopped and asked them what made them look so depressed.

The groom's father said: Groom's father: You see, son, it's like this. We are all set to go in the wedding procession. But we need a horse for the groom. The man who was supposed to bring it hasn't turned up, the auspicious hour is almost gone. And the groom himself stepped up to the boy and said: Groom: I am the groom. Waiting to see my bride, But I'm stuck in here Just hoping for a ride! I just can't go there on my feet. My horse is late and so is the hour. My guests are all waiting to eat. I'll miss my wedding for sure! So you see, what I need right now is a horse! I need a horse! A really quick horse! Chorus: He needs a horse, he needs a horse!He needs a really fast horse! And so the boy, being helpful as ever, offered his horse to the groom. The groom was very happy and he asked the boy what he could give him in exchange for his horse. The boy looked around among the musicians and quickly spotted the drummer. He said: Boy: A stitch in time they say saves nine. And what indeed did save the day, Was this splendid horse of mine! All I want from you is That fine little drum that you play! Oh, make my dreams come true! Please make my dream come true! The groom requested the drummer to hand over the drum to the boy. The drummer knew he would easily get enough money to buy himself a brand new drum. He willingly gave his drum away.

The boy rushed home singing his song and playing his new drum. He could not wait to tell his mother how she had helped him to get his drum. Boy: My piece of wood did a lot of good! It got me bread as food. My piece of bread lasted not, But gave me a lovely pot. My pot got me a lovely coat. The coat did help a needy man. I got me a big fine horse to ride. With that horse, I got a groom his bride! So you see it is simple indeed A little bit of give and take, Will a lot of people happy make! So when you meet your friends today, Try and make their day!
